Volt Europa - Data Protection Report 2020
Data Protection Officers
Mariano delli Santi had ended his activities as DPO because a change in his job did not 
leave him time to continue. Thanks a lot to him for his activity the time before.
The Board appointed Robert Seifert in July and Mistale Taylor in August as new DPOs. 
Data Governance
DPO Mistale Taylor takes part in the new founded  “Governance Commission”.
The DPOs keep an eye on the declaration of data policy, which has to be included in 
websites, so Volt Europa can publish a legal adequate and sufficient version.
The DPOs gave advice on how to modify privacy documents on national websites.
Accountability
The “Data Protection Library”, placed on Google-Drive, was started in November. This 
collection of relevant data protection documents serves as a reference book for Volt as 
well as complying with Art. 5 (2) GDPR to supervisory authorities. This project will be 
continued in 2021.
Rights of the data subject
Several requests reached the DPO. We coordinated the requested actions in close 
cooperation with the Tech Lead Jose Antonio Abellan Lax. Some requests concerned 
information about personal data, others concern the deletion of data, mostly about e-
mail accounts that are no longer used.
This led to a general guideline. The DPOs submitted a proposal to the Bord of Volt 
Europa for “Guidelines for handling requests relating to the rights of data subjects 
(Art. 15 - 22 GDPR)”, which the Board approved in December.
An information sheet for data subjects according to Art. 13 GDPR was set up and placed 
in the “Data Protection Library” where anyone can read and download the information 
we are obliged to provide.
Joint Contollership
The work of the “Data Processing Agreement Working Group” was taken up and 
continued. Drafts for a “Joint Controllership Agreement” according to Art. 26 GDPR was 
sent to some national chapters of Volt, such as Germany, the Netherlands and Italy.
In December the Agreements with Germany and Netherlands were established by the 
European Board and the national Boards. More agreements with other Member 
Associations will follow next.
Technical and organisational measures [TOM] 
According to Art. 25 and 32 GDPR there are processing contracts needed with external 
processors, e.g. software suppliers. The DPOs started an overview and arranged the 
completion of the contracts and agreements.


Page 2 - Volt Data Protection Report 2020
Records of processing activities
There is no obligation to keep records of processing activities for organisations 
employing fewer than 250 persons, except if there are special risks [Art. 30 (5) GDPR].
Nevertheless it is favorable to have an overview about this. So the DPOs started to build 
a register of processing activities; it will be continued in 2021.
Risk assessment
If the data processing "is likely to result in a high risk for the rights and freedoms of 
natural persons" [Art. 35 (1) GDPR] a ”Data Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA)” is 
required. This is obvious e. g. for health data. The DPOs help to analyse, if a specific 
processing needs a DPIA. If it is needed, a special software tool developed in France, 
adopted by German authorities, guides through the process of establishing the DPIA or 
the DPO can conduct a DPIA following the ICO model.
Until now the DPOs were involved in one software development. We could find out that 
therefore no DPIA is needed.
Personal data breach 
Rules for handling of data breaches according to Art. 33 – 34 GDPR are not yet defined. 
This will be a project for 2021.
National chapters
Beyond the topics mentioned above there have been some contacts to know each other 
and to discuss advice for national data governance. 
Perspective
There is a high level of awareness of data protection in Volt Europa. We will help to take 
the legally correct measures for this.
We want to complete the “Data Protection Library” to be able to demonstrate 
compliance with the GDPR and show accountability as Art. 5 GDPR demanded. 
We will work for more “Joint Controllership Agreements” and other data processing 
contracts with national chapters.
We want to expand the network of data protection management in Volt.
And we try to answer questions about data protection to the best of our knowledge and 
belief.
December 2020
Mistale Taylor
Robert Seifert
Co-Data Protection Officer
Co-Data Protection Officer
