" VOLT EUROPA "
PART I. : NAME, SEAT, PURPOSE, DURATION
Article 1 : Name and logo
The association (“Association”) has the status of an international non-profit association (in Dutch
“internationale vereniging zonder winstoogmerk”) and it is governed by the Belgian Companies and
Associations Code (in these Statutes further on referred to as the “Code”).
The name of the Association is “Volt Europa”.
The current logo of the Association is defined in Annex A to these statutes and may be changed by
decision of the General Assembly (as defined in Part III of these Statutes).
Article 2 : Registered office
The seat (registered office) of the Association is established in the Capital Region of Brussels.
It may, by a decision of the Board of Directors (as described in Part IV of these Statutes), be
transferred to another location in Belgium, in accordance with the applicable legal provisions on the use of
languages.
Any transfer of the registered office must be published in the annexes to the Belgian State Gazette
under the responsibility of the Board of Directors.
Article 3 : Purpose and activities
The Association observes the values on which the European Union is founded, as expressed in article
2 of the Treaty on European Union, namely respect for human dignity, freedom, democracy, equality, the rule
of law and respect for human rights, including the rights of persons belonging to minorities.
The Association has the non-profit international purpose to coordinate all the natural and legal
persons and associations based throughout the European Union and beyond, which form and promote the
transnational and pan-European political movement Volt, based on the Volt Charter, attached in Annex B,
with the goal to register as a European political party within the term of EU Regulation 1141/2014 of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 22 October 2014 on the statute and funding of European political
parties and political foundations (hereinafter “Regulation 1141/2014”) and will hence act in view of
reaching:
●
a united Europe that values its citizens and residents, who are able to fulfill their unique potential
and continuously strive to achieve together the highest standards of human, social,
environmental, and technical development;
●
a society where individuals have the rights to choose how they want to lead their life including
choosing one's religion, gender, sexual orientation, education, profession and personal
aspirations and goals and where individuals shall have a voice and shall be able to influence
public decision-making;
●
a state that is the guarantor for the rights of every individual, the enabler for the young and for
vulnerable individuals to partake fully in society, and the system of solidarity by which it
ensures a minimum decent standard of living for everyone, while intervening as little and as fast
as possible and as much and as long as needed;
●
a free and open market economy, within the rules of a functioning legal system and with equal
chances to participate and thrive, that creates the greatest possible wealth for everyone, enhanced
by a state creating space for innovation and enabling research and counterweighting systematic
1/12


imbalances such an economy creates. In such economy agglomeration of additional wealth
should be possible for the hard working and all professions should be valued, especially
education, care and research, which benefit our societies the most;
●
a strengthened European identity, complementary to the national and local ones, to foster a sense
of solidarity, cooperation, and belonging in the European people, enabling a common future of
sustainable peace, shared prosperity and international relevance.
The activities that the Association will carry out in order to achieve its purpose are mainly as
follows:
●
represent the Volt movement;
●
define Volt’s strategic and political direction, especially by:
(i) defining, communicating, and implementing Volt’s European strategy, political vision,
program, and policies;
(ii) ensuring compliance with the political guidelines as set by the effective members (as defined
in Article 5 of these Statutes) and coherence among the members;
(iii)coordinating and reviewing national political programs and policies of Member Associations
and Associated Member Associations, issuing recommendations to Member
Associations and Associated Member Associations to ensure
consistency with the Volt
Charter, the Association’s strategy and political vision, program and policies; and
(iv) setting up and promoting local chapters and associations of Volt in new countries, including
through activities at the local, regional, national and European levels; ●ensure the Volt movement’s
operational efficiency, especially by:
(i) facilitating, supporting, and coordinating the operation of all members across all functions
and ensuring coherence of the organisational structures;
(ii) assisting members in promoting the Volt movement and running for elections across Europe;
and
(iii)providing training for members;
●
coordinate the Volt movement’s European campaigns and members in the European Parliament,
especially by:
(i) supporting the development and promotion of Volt’s European campaigns;
(ii) coordinating the selection procedure of candidates to the European Parliament; and
(iii)coordinating the Volt movement’s European Parliamentary members and, if existent, its
faction.
The Association may carry out all acts directly or indirectly related to the achievement of its purpose
and activities. To that end, it may buy, sell, take on lease and let out, possess all movable and immovable
property and facilities, mortgage the same, accept inter vivos and testamentary gifts subject to the
authorizations foreseen in the Code.
Article 4 : Duration
The Association is created for an unlimited duration.
PART II. : MEMBERS
Article 5 : Categories of members - Requirements
The Association is open to natural persons, regardless whether they are citizens of a member state of
the EU or not, and legal persons that are legally incorporated under the law of the member state of the EU in
which they have their seat.
2/12


The Association is composed of an unlimited number of ‘effective members’ and ‘associated
members’. The minimum number of effective members may not be less than three (3).
They shall not be personally liable for any commitments entered into by the Association.
a) Effective members
Effective members can be legal persons (referred to as “Member Associations”) and natural persons
(referred to as “Individual Members”).
I. Member Associations
Member Associations are Belgian or foreign legal persons or organisations admitted in this quality
and which simultaneously meet the following conditions:
(i)
to be duly incorporated as legal person or organization under applicable law of a member
State of the European Union and/or to be officially recognised as a political party in a
member State of the European Union;
(ii)
to have the name “Volt”, followed by the name of the country in which the Member
Association is based, in English and/or in the national language(s) or to have taken the
written undertaking to change their name as mentioned in this clause within six (6) months
of admission, unless not allowed or particularly onerous (in terms of time and/or money)
under national legislation of the country in which the Member Association is incorporated;
(iii)
to be in line with the manifesto and political values of the Association and to these Statutes;
(iv)
to have a general assembly open to or representative of all its members, a fully elected
leadership of at least three people and transparent procedures to elect candidates for political
mandates;
(v)
to intend to be politically active and participate in local, regional, national and European
elections;
(vi)
not to be subordinated to any other political association, group or party; and (vii) be the only
Member Association in the country of reference.
The Association comprises at the most as many Member Associations as there are member countries
of the European Union, that is one Member Association per country.
II.
Individual
Members
Individual Members are:
(i)
the founding members signatories of the incorporation deed of the Association; and
(ii)
all members of the Member Associations, which have applied for membership and have
been admitted in accordance with Article 6; and
(iii)
natural persons that are citizens and/or residents of a member State of the European Union,
which due to their nationality and/or place of residence cannot become members of a
Member Association, are not members of any other political party whose purpose conflicts
with the Association’s purpose and subscribe to the manifesto and political values of the
Association to these Statutes and to the Internal Regulations, which have applied for
membership and have been admitted in accordance with Article 6.
The Internal Regulations can foresee further requirements, which Individual Members, Member
Associations and members of Member Associations must meet.
3/12


b) Associated members
The associated members are persons admitted as such under this category and who wish to help the
Association or participate in its activities. Associated members can be legal persons (referred to as
“Associated Member Associations”) and natural persons (referred to as “Associated Individual Members”).
The associated members are not entitled to vote and are invited to participate at the General
Assembly meetings but only in an advisory capacity and with the right to file motions.
I. Associated Member Associations
Associated Member Associations are Belgian or foreign legal persons or organisations admitted in
this quality and which simultaneously meet the following conditions:
(i)
to be duly incorporated as legal person or organization under the applicable law of the
country where the legal person is established and/or to be officially recognised as a political
party in such country;
(ii)
if recognised as a political party, to have the name “Volt”, followed by the name of the
country in which it is based, in English and/or in the national language(s) or to have taken
the written undertaking to change their name as mentioned in this clause within six (6)
months of admission, unless not allowed or particularly onerous (in terms of time and/or
money) under national legislation of the country in which the Member Association is
incorporated;
(iii)
to be in line with the manifesto and political values of the Association and to these Statutes;
(iv)
if recognised as a political party, to intend to be politically active and participate in local,
regional, national and, where applicable, European elections;
(v)
not to be subordinated to any other political association, group or party;
(vi)
to undertake to modify its statutes and/or internal regulations to foresee a general assembly
open to or representative of all its members, a fully elected leadership of at least three people
and transparent procedures to elect candidates for political mandates (if applicable); and
(vii)
if recognised as a political party, not to be incorporated in a country in which is incorporated
a Member Association.
II.
Associated
Individual
Members
Associated Individual Members are:
(i)
all members of the Associated Member Associations, which have applied for membership
and have been admitted in accordance with Article 6; and
(ii)
natural persons, which due to their nationality and/or place of residence cannot become
Individual Members, members of a Member Association or members of an Associated
Member Association, are not members of any other political party whose purpose conflicts
with the Association’s purpose and subscribe to the manifesto and political values of the
Association to these Statutes and to the Internal Regulations, which have applied for
membership and have been admitted in accordance with Article 6.
The Internal Regulations can foresee further requirements, which Associated Individual Members,
Associated Member Association and members of Associated Member Associations must meet.
4/12


Article 6 : Admission
Unless otherwise foreseen in these Statutes or in the Internal Regulations, admissions of new
members shall be decided by the Board of Directors. Natural persons whose application for membership has
been rejected may appeal the decision of the Board of Directors before the Conflict Resolution Body.
Admission of legal persons as Member Associations or as Associated Member Associations requires
approval of both the Board of Directors and the Country Council. The admission of members shall be further
regulated by the Internal Regulations.
Membership of the Association automatically entails acceptance of the Statutes of the Association
and its Internal Regulations.
Article 7 : Resignation – Suspension - Exclusion
Membership ends by:
-
voluntary resignation, subject to a notice of thirty (30) days notified in writing to the Board of
Directors;
-
for Individual Members and Associated Individual Members, death;
-
for Individual Members mentioned under Article 5 a) II. (ii), loss of their membership of the
Member
Association to which they belong;
-
for Associated Individual Members mentioned under Article 5 b) II. (i), loss of their membership of
the Associated Member Association to which they belong;
-
for Member Associations and Associated Member Associations, liquidation;
-
exclusion decided by the Board of Directors; The Internal Regulations may further specify grounds
for and the procedure of exclusion of members.
-
failing to abide with essential requisites of these Statutes or of the Internal Regulations, such as for
example a failure to pay the membership fee within prescribed delay, will result in suspension of the
member concerned until the failure has been remedied. The Internal Regulations may further specify
grounds for and the procedure of suspension of members.
Members who resigned or were excluded, as well as their successors shall have no rights,
whatsoever, on the assets of the Association and shall not be entitled to claim any reimbursement of any
nature whatsoever, unless otherwise foreseen in the Internal Regulations.
The Internal Regulations can foresee additional exclusion and sanction rules, provided the clauses
that foresee such rules have been accepted by the General Assembly with a majority of two thirds (2/3) of the
members present or represented.
Article 8 : Membership fees
Members shall pay an annual membership fee, the amount and payment method of which are
determined each year by the General Assembly. The General Assembly can foresee different membership
fees for each category of members (Member Associations, Individual Members that are also members of a
Member Association, Individual Members that are not members of a Member Association, Associated
Member Associations, Associated Individual Members that are also members of an Associated Member
Association and Associated Individual Members that are not members of an Associated Member
Association) and can decide that for all or some categories no membership fee is due.
Article 9 : Rights and duties of members
Members shall have the rights and duties determined in these Statutes and in the Internal
5/12


Regulations.
Only effective members that have been members of the Association since thirty (30) days at least
have the right to vote at the General Assembly meetings. The associated members have the right to
participate at the General Assembly meetings but only in an advisory capacity and without right to vote, but
with the right to file motions.
6/12


PART III. : GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Article 10 : Composition – Powers
The General Assembly is composed of all the effective members.
The General Assembly shall have the following exclusive competences:
●
amendments to the Statutes;
●
election and revocation of members of the Board of Directors;
●
as the case may be, the appointment, the determination of the remuneration and the revocation of
the auditor(s);
●
discharge of the Directors and of the auditor(s), if any;
●
approval of the budgets and accounts;
●
approval of and amendments to the Internal Regulations;
●
the voluntary dissolution of the Association and the appointment of one or more liquidators;
●
exclusion of members of the Association;
●
all other issues provided in these Statutes, the Internal Regulations or the Code.
Article 11 : Meetings - Notices - Representation
The General Assembly meets upon notice of the Board of Directors at least once a year within six
months of the closing of the financial year, the latter being called "Annual Assembly".
It must be convened upon request of
(a)
at least half of the directors or
(b)
at least one twentieth (1/20) of the effective members or
(c)
the Country Council.
The meetings are held at the registered office or at any other place indicated in the notice, which can
also be outside of Belgium.
The notice contains the agenda and is notified by letter sent by postal mail, electronic mail or by
telefax, at least one (1) month prior to the date of the meeting.
All of the members shall be convened, but only effective members have the right to vote at the
General Assembly.
The Internal Regulations can further specify the requirements, conditions and procedure of
convening the General Assembly.
Article 12 : Deliberations
The General Assembly can only decide on the items included in the agenda.
a) Quorum
Unless otherwise provided in these Statutes or in the Internal Regulations, the General Assembly can
validly deliberate and decide regardless of the number of members present and represented.
b) Majorities
Unless otherwise provided in these Statutes or in the Internal Regulations, the decisions shall be
adopted by a majority of the votes of the members present and represented.
Null and blank votes and abstentions are not taken into account for the calculation of the majorities.
In case of a tie, there will be a second vote.
7/12


c) Physical meetings and electronic meetings
The General Assembly takes place in the form of electronic meetings, in which case all members will
be able to connect by phone conference or videoconference and will be able to vote by electronic means. A
physical place of meeting can be indicated and all members who wish to do so, can take part in person at
such a meeting place.
In case of a physical meeting, each Individual Member is allowed, by means of a document carrying
their signature, including the digital signature as defined in article 1322 of the Belgian Civil code,
transmitted by letter, telefax, electronic mail or by any other means of communication provided for in article
2281 of the same Code, to give a proxy to another Individual Member, to represent them at a given General
Assembly meeting and to vote in their name. A member cannot hold more than one proxy, unless in case of
deliberations and decisions on changes to the Statutes, in which case the number of proxies is not limited.
The notice for the General Assembly must indicate whether the meeting will be a physical meeting
or an electronic meeting.
The Internal Regulations can specify requirements and conditions of the General Assembly’s
deliberations, in particular the voting process for both types of meetings.
Article 13 : Minutes
Each meeting of the General Assembly shall be recorded in minutes, as further specified in the
Internal Regulations.
PART IV. : ADMINISTRATION
Article 14 : Board of Directors
The Association shall be managed by an administration organ (herein designated as the "Board of
Directors"), consisting of at least (3) Individual Members who cannot have any leadership function (as can
be better defined in the Internal Regulations) in any of the Member Associations or Associated Member
Associations, appointed by the General Assembly and dismissible at all times by it.
The Board of Directors shall at least consist of two Co-Presidents and a Treasurer (Executive
directors) and six (6) other board members.
The Directors are elected by the General Assembly for a term expiring at the issue of the third
Annual Assembly following the year of the appointment. The Directors can be appointed for a maximum of
two (2) successive terms. For the calculation of the total amount of terms, the number of mandates as
Co-President, as Treasurer and as other Board member shall be considered separately.
The Co-Presidents cannot be of the same single nationality or have been legal members of the same
Member Association during the two (2) year period prior to their election.
The Directors shall incur no personal obligation because of their office, except in case of gross
negligence and/or intentional fault, and shall be liable only for the performance of their office.
Each of the Co-Presidents will be the official spokesperson of the Association.
The Internal Regulations may further specify:
-
requirements for the submission of candidatures for the positions on the Board of Directors;
-
the process of electing the Directors, rules of incompatibility and rules related to national diversity;
-
the roles of the members of the Board of Directors.
Article 15 : End of mandate – Vacancy
The Director's office shall end by:
-
voluntary resignation by written notice of thirty (30) days to the Board of Directors;
8/12


-
expiration of its term;
-
death;
-
insolvency, civil incapacity or provisional administration;
-
removal by a majority vote in both the General Assembly and the Country Council, by a process that
shall be further elaborated in the Internal Regulations.
In the case of vacancy of one or several Director's offices, the remaining Directors can provide for a
temporary replacement(s). The Director so appointed shall complete the office of the Director they replace,
provided its appointment is confirmed by the General Assembly at its next meeting.
Article 16 : Powers of the Board of Directors – Daily management
The board of directors has the broadest powers to administer and manage the Association within the
limits of its purpose. Everything that is not expressly reserved to the General Assembly or to other
committees and bodies by virtue of these statutes or of the Internal Regulations is the competence of the
board of directors.
The board of directors appoints and revokes, either itself or by proxy, all employees and members of
the personnel of the Association.
The board of directors can, under its responsibility, delegate the daily management or part of its
powers, to one or several directors or third parties. The board of directors will determine in writing the extent
of the powers so delegated, the way to exercise them and the duration of the mandate so conferred.
The conditions and terms of payment of remunerations and expenses of the Board of Directors and of
all the employees and members of the personnel of the Association shall be defined in the Internal
Regulations.
Article 17 : Meetings of the Board of Directors
The Board of Directors shall meet upon notice of at least one of the Co-Presidents as often as
deemed necessary but at least once per month, and each time at least two (2) Directors request to do so, if not
regulated otherwise in the Internal Regulations.
Article 18 : Deliberations of the Board of Directors
The Board of Directors can only validly deliberate if the majority of its members is present.
Decisions of the Board of Directors are taken by a majority of votes.
The Directors can also deliberate and take all decisions by unanimous written consent and by means
of a conference call or a video conference.
In case of unanimous written consent, a proposal of resolution must be simultaneously
communicated to all Directors and be unconditionally approved by them in writing, even by email.
Article 19 : Minutes of the Board of Directors meetings
The decisions of the Board of Directors are recorded in minutes, as further specified in the Internal
Regulations.
Article 20 : Representation
Notwithstanding the general powers of representation of the Board of Directors as a collegial body,
the Association shall be validly represented in court and towards third parties, including any public officer
(including the mortgage registrar – “conservateur des hypothèques”) by two Directors, acting jointly.
9/12


PART V. : INTERNAL REGULATIONS AND ADDITIONAL ORGANS OF THE ASSOCIATION
Article 21 : Internal Regulations
The General Assembly can adopt Internal Regulations which detail the provisions of these Statutes,
define the practical modalities for the functioning of the Association and foresee the establishment, election
or appointment and functioning of internal bodies of the Association. The Internal
Regulation may not conflict with these Statutes.
The Board of Directors can propose Internal Regulations to the General Assembly and the Internal
Regulations can foresee other or additional bodies that can propose amendments to the Internal Regulations.
All amendments to the Internal Regulations must be submitted to the vote of the General Assembly.
In addition to the organs foreseen under these Statutes, the Internal Regulations will foresee at least
the following internal bodies:
●
an electoral commission that will organise and supervise all internal elections for organs of the
Association, as well as the election process for candidates for public mandates;
The Internal Regulations will define the names of such internal bodies, as well as their precise
competences, in line with the above. The Internal Regulations can foresee additional bodies.
When the Association will be recognised as a European political party, as defined in Regulation
1141/2014, the Internal Regulations shall also foresee how the national chapters of the Association must be
organised. This organisation must correspond at least to what is foreseen under Article 9 a) I (v).
Article 22 : Country Council
The Country Council is a body of the Association of which every Member Association and
Associated Member Association is a member, represented by two eligible representatives.
The Country Council shall have the following competencies:
(i)
admission of Member Associations and Associated Member Associations, as
foreseen
in Article 6 of the Statutes;
(ii)
decisions on political coalitions and alliances at the European level;
(iii)
convening a General Assembly, as foreseen in Article 11 of the Statutes.
The Internal Regulations can further detail the functioning of the Country Council and can attribute
additional competences.
Article 23 : Arbitration Committee
The Arbitration Committee has the task of resolving conflicts of legal nature within the Association,
ensuring compliance with the Statutes and Internal Regulations and reviewing the legality of decisions made
by the Board of Volt Europa.
The Internal Regulations further detail the object and functioning of the Arbitration Committee.
10/12


PART VI. : TRANSPARENCY - BOOKKEEPING - ACCOUNTS AND DONATIONS - PRIVACY AND
PROTECTION OF PERSONAL DATA
Article 24 : Accounting year – Annual accounts
The accounting year shall begin on 1 January and end on 31 December of each calendar year.
Each year, the Board of Directors draws up the annual accounts of the past accounting year, in
accordance with the legal provisions regulating this matter, as well as the budget for the forthcoming year.
Both shall be submitted for approval to the General Assembly at its nearest annual meeting.
The approved annual accounts shall then be filed by the Board of Directors with the clerk's office of
the competent Commercial Court.
The accounting shall be conducted in accordance with the legal provisions regulating this matter.
Article 25 : Control – Auditor
To the extent the Association is so legally required, the audit of its financial situation, the financial
statements and the compliance with the Code and these Statutes of the operations to be entered in the annual
accounts, must be entrusted to one or more auditors, appointed by the General Assembly among the members
of the Institute of Company Auditors.
The auditors are appointed for a term of three (3) years, renewable. The possible auditor’s fees
consist of a flat amount determined at the beginning of their mandate by the General Assembly. They can
only be modified with the consent of the parties.
Article 26 : Donations
The Association publishes an annual list of donations received, specifying both the donor and the
donation, for every donation exceeding 3.000 euro per donation or donor per year.
The Internal Regulation can foresee more detailed provisions on the Association’s donation policy.
Article 27 : Privacy and Data Protection
The Association complies with all relevant national and European laws regarding data protection, in
particular the Regulation 2016/679. The Association ensures only needed and relevant data is collected and
that it is securely stored.
PART VII. : AMENDMENTS TO THE STATUTES - DISSOLUTION
Article 28 : Special provisions for amendments to the Statutes
The Statutes may be amended at any time by a decision of the General Assembly. The notice to such
a meeting contains a detailed agenda of the proposed amendments and must be sent to all members at least
one (1) month before the meeting date.
The General Assembly can only validly deliberate and decide on an amendment of the Statutes if at
least one third (1/3) of the effective members are present or represented. If this quorum is not met, a second
meeting can be convened with the same agenda, which shall validly deliberate regardless of the number of
effective members present or represented. The second meeting cannot be held earlier than fifteen (15) days,
nor later than one (1) year after the first meeting.
Any amendment to the Statutes shall be adopted provided it is approved by a majority of two thirds
(2/3) of the votes of the effective members present or represented.
11/12


However, any amendment to the purposes of the Association, as well as to the activities it intended to
implement in order to achieve these purposes, must be approved by a majority of four fifth (4/5) of the votes
of the effective members present or represented.
Amendments to the statutory provisions referred to in article 2:10 §2 6°, 8° and 9° of the Code must
be recorded in a notarial deed. In addition, any amendment to the purpose of the Association, as well as to
the activities it intended to implement in order to achieve the purpose, must be approved by a royal decree.
Article 29 : Dissolution – Liquidation – Allocation of asset
Without prejudice of the provisions of Article 2 :109 of the Code, the Association can be dissolved at
any time by a decision of the General Assembly taken under the same conditions as for the amendments of
the purpose of the Association.
In the event of dissolution of the Association, for whatever reason, the liquidation shall be carried out
by one or more liquidators who shall perform their duties, either by virtue of a resolution of the General
Assembly or, in the absence thereof, by a court decision that may be initiated by any interested party.
In all events of voluntary or legal dissolution of the Association, at any time and due to any cause,
the allocation of the possible net assets after liquidation shall be determined by the General Assembly or, in
the absence thereof, by the liquidators. This asset will have to be allocated for a disinterested purpose as
close as possible to the purpose of the Association as described in Article 3.
PART VIII. : GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 30 : Election of domicile
Any member, director, auditor or liquidator residing abroad who has not elected domicile (an official
address for service) in Belgium, validly reported to the Association, shall be deemed to have elected domicile
at the registered office where all instruments can be validly served or notified, with no other obligation for
the Association than to keep such instruments available for the addressee. A copy of said documents and
notifications shall also be sent, for information, to the addressee's residence abroad.
Article 31 : Legal reference
All issues not explicitly covered by these Statutes and by the Internal Regulations shall be governed
by the Code. Consequently, the provisions of the Code which cannot be lawfully departed from shall be
deemed enshrined in these Statutes and such clauses which contradict the imperative provisions of the Code
or might become contradictory to the same, shall be deemed as unwritten.
Article 32 : Language
The two working languages of the Association are Dutch and English.
These Statutes are written in Dutch and translated into English. In case of doubt, contradiction or
interpretation problems between the two versions, the Dutch version shall prevail.
All the instruments and documents of the Association required by the laws and regulations must be
drawn up in the language of the Region in which the Association has its registered office. This includes,
among others, when requested by these laws and regulations, the minutes of the meetings of the General
Assembly and the Board of Directors, to be recorded or not by a notary, as well as any instrument subject to
be made public through a legal publicity or to filing requirements with the clerk's office of the commercial
court. All these instruments and documents must imperatively be drafted at least in Dutch. An English
version will always be made available.
12/12


