Volt’s programme for 
 
the European Parliament
2019 - 2024
The Amsterdam 
Declaration


Foreword
In a time of great political tensions, a group of Europeans from all 
walks of life decided it was time to stand up for what they believed 
in. It was time to act; Volt was born. We came together to ﬁght for 
a better society, to express our commitment towards cooperation, 
and to outline our belief in a shared future. Ours is a message of 
hope, of courage, and of solidarity. A message for all to see that 
divisions will not tear down what our parents have built. Volt was 
created to re-energise Europe and to solve the issues we all have in 
common. Volt oﬀers Europeans a new vision for Europe, one that 
embraces the EU’s common aspirations and that faces its shortcom-
ings head-on.
Today, Volt is running for the European Parliament, to bring new 
energy to politics and to shape the Europe we all need.
A Europe based on a strong political Union, where risks are shared, 
where beneﬁts reach all Europeans, and where every person has a 
voice. A Union that shall be ﬁxed. A Europe with a robust economy 
that provides opportunities for all, now and for generations to 
come. A Union that is an economic powerhouse. A Europe that 
takes care of its people, where children enjoy a cleaner environ-
ment, where migration ﬂows are managed together, and where 
rights are guaranteed and responsibilities shared. A truly progres-
sive Union.
 
Unprecedented in European history, Volt will campaign for the 
European elections on a single, common platform: the Amsterdam 
Declaration. A platform which is both visionary and realistic. Volt 
wants to ensure that it delivers on its promises, while settling for 
nothing less than a new and improved Europe. 
The following programme details what Volt aims to achieve in the 
European Parliament, and is supported by a longer document 
explaining in more details what we will do and how we will do it.  
Volt has ensured that all of its commitments can be worked upon in 
the European Parliament.


A vote for Volt
will be a vote to:
#1 Fix the EU
by   > creating a strong political union
        > empowering its citizens
        > increasing security 
           and accountability
#2 Make Europe an
economic powerhouse
by   > boosting growth and 
           standards of living
        > investing in the future
        > putting education ﬁrst
#3 Build a just and 
sustainable society
by   > seizing green opportunities
        > managing migration humanely and    
            responsibly
        > pushing for fairness and equality 


Fix the EU
by creating a strong
political Union
Over the past sixty years, the EU has grown from a guardian of peace in Europe to something more mean-
ingful, as it now works to secure rights, enhance trade, increase shared prosperity, and protect our heri-
tage and environment. However, crises have shown that our institutions are unable to meet their goals. 
The EU needs to be reformed as the future lies in a federal and truly democratic Europe that will be led 
by and built by its citizens.
> Empower Members of the European Parliament to fully represent citi-
zens’ interests by being able to propose bills. As the only directly-elected EU 
institution, the European Parliament must be given the right to initiate legisla-
tion – just like national parliaments. 
> Ensure that the work of the Parliament is fully transparent and prevent 
last-minute rewrites and back-room deals. Record and make public all votes 
of Members of the European Parliament, and ensure a ﬁxed time span for 
public review of bills before they are voted on. 
> Ensure fair representation of all EU citizens and strengthen the link 
between citizens and their representatives. This can be ensured by imple-
menting the same voting rules for the European Parliament elections across 
the EU and by having citizens locally elect their Members of the European 
Parliament, whilst ensuring proportionality.
> Establish a Federal Europe with a European Government, headed by a 
Prime Minister elected by the Parliament, and with a President elected by the 
people. This will create a strong, open and transparent European parliamen-
tary democracy. 
> Enable the creation of real EU political parties. Current EU parties are 
loose coalitions of national parties, often with conﬂicting interests; a real EU 
democracy needs strong parties defending their vision of the future of 
Europe. 
> Ensure the EU’s ability to act by deciding by majority on all issues in the 
Councils. Currently, States still decide on many issues by unanimity or consen-
sus, making it far easier to block than to act. 
> Make our economy stronger and sustainable through a Eurozone+ budget, 
a Banking Union, and a full Economic and Monetary Union under a European 
Finance Minister who will represent the EU. 
> Give the European Central Bank the power to support employment and 
growth, as well as prevent and solve ﬁnancial crises. Beyond limiting inﬂation, 
the European Central Bank’s mandate must be expanded to promote employ-
ment, sustainable growth, and crisis prevention and mitigation. 
> Ensure multinationals pay their fair share by collecting a minimum Euro-
pean corporate tax of 15% and harmonising corporate taxation across 
Member States. Tax avoidance by multinationals has undermined the ﬁnancing 
of public services for decades.
Governance
Economy and 
ﬁnance
European 
Parliament
#1
1


Fix the EU
by empowering its
citizens
Europeans often feel unable to have their voice heard and to participate in decision-making pro-
cesses. They often feel left out of politics. By empowering citizens, democracy will be strength-
ened. Firstly, barriers to inclusion need to be removed. Secondly, Europeans need to be given the 
opportunity to participate in decision-making processes beyond elections. Thirdly, conditions for 
deliberation and reasonable debate need to be put in place, to enable Europeans and policy-
makers to take informed decisions.
> Strengthen tomorrow’s democracy with today’s education, by pushing 
States to include media literacy, citizenship education and knowledge of insti-
tutions in their curricula. This will strengthen EU citizens’ active engagement in 
public life.
> Create real, trustworthy European news, by introducing a common Euro-
pean Public Broadcasting Platform. This will supply EU citizens with an eﬀec-
tive means of receiving information.
> Remove barriers to voting for the European Parliament, by testing elec-
tronic voting to oﬀer voters better accessibility to elections, including expatri-
ates and those with reduced mobility. 
> Grant better access to public services and make it easy to interact with 
EU administrations, by introducing an e-ID and by digitalizing the EU adminis-
tration.
> Enable Europeans to participate in policy-making, by creating digital plat-
forms and citizen assemblies. This will give people the possibility to give feed-
back on legislative proposals, take part in political decisions and shape their 
societies.
> Give Europeans a say in how the budget of the EU is allocated, by imple-
menting participatory budgeting. EU citizens will be able to decide how a spe-
ciﬁc portion of EU funds is spent.
Inclusion
Participation
Deliberation
2
#1
The Amsterdam Declaration          www.volteuropa.org


Fix the EU
by increasing security and 
accountability
Security, transparency and anti-corruption measures are essential for generating trust in govern-
ments. The EU can and must do more on each of these ﬁelds. While Member States invest a lot in 
security, many resources are wasted due to duplication of investments and ineﬃciencies. The EU is 
in a better position to deal with cross-border threats. The ﬁght against corruption and eﬀorts 
towards better transparency need to be signiﬁcantly improved.
> Make EU project funding dependent on national eﬀorts to ﬁght corrup-
tion. Member States combating corruption will see their eﬀorts rewarded, and 
others failing to do so will be sanctioned. 
> Stop corruption by granting new investigative powers to the European 
Anti-Fraud and Public Prosecutor’s Oﬃces, and increase the competences of 
the European Ombudsman to include examining suspicious handling of public 
funds.
> Boost European defense capabilities, by establishing a European army of 
committed Member States, while working towards the creation of EU-wide 
permanent forces with a uniﬁed EU military command under civilian control.
> Strengthen European internal security, by turning the EU’s current law 
enforcement agency (Europol) into a true federal-level police force and grant-
ing it authority to ﬁght crossborder crime, terrorism and cybersecurity threats.
> Ensure the safety of the EU’s digital infrastructure, by making all EU soft-
ware open source. This will reduce the dependency on monopolistic compa-
nies and will make our institutions cheaper, more transparent, and more resil-
ient to data breaches.
> Increase the transparency of the EU, by requiring elected oﬃcials to 
disclose their oﬃce expenses and spending. 
> Protect the press and whistleblowers, by introducing strict guidelines 
limiting government punishment for the publication of conﬁdential informa-
tion in the public interest.
> Make all lobbying in the European Institutions transparent and moni-
tored. The registration of all lobbying activities in the public transparency 
register will be made mandatory, and a strict code of conduct will be intro-
duced.
Security
Transparency
Corruption
3
#1
The Amsterdam Declaration          www.volteuropa.org


Make Europe an 
Economic Powerhouse
by boosting growth and 
standards of living
The lack of quality jobs in many European countries is increasingly harmful, particularly to the Euro-
pean youth. Without enough jobs, room for entrepreneurship and equal chances for everyone, the 
continent will not thrive. Entrepreneurship needs to be promoted and access to opportunities 
made easier. Unemployment should be tackled by investing in education and empowering citizens 
in their job search, and those in need have to be supported.
> Ensure decent living standards, by adopting a minimum income above pov-
erty level in all Member States.
> Support people who lost their jobs in sectors or regions aﬀected by eco-
nomic crises, by doubling the funding of the European Globalisation Adjust-
ment Fund and making it more ﬂexible. These mechanisms will make the tran-
sition toward new jobs easier when a company ceases operations due to eco-
nomic diﬃculties or moves outside the EU.
> Channel EU funds in challenged regions to create jobs, by sponsoring 
smart and environmentally friendly investments, such as high-speed railway 
connections, improved accessibility and connectivity to rural areas and clean, 
local energy production sites.
> Increase public spending on professional and vocational education to 
increase lifelong employability and the international competitiveness of 
apprentices. A special focus will be placed on areas with high long-term unem-
ployment.
> Make it easier to ﬁnd a job across Europe, by setting up a real European 
Labour Platform to match the unemployed and employers across Europe. 
Expand the European Employment Services (EURES) and foster better coop-
eration with the private sector in order to move towards a truly united labour 
market.
> Invest in programmes supporting decentralised digital labour, by provid-
ing devices and digital skills trainings at low costs. Investments will be focused 
on regions with high unemployment rates and with low level of digital skills or 
access to technology.
> Make it easy to set up a business by creating a European Digital One Stop 
Shop. This will enable people to set up a business in 3 working days at a mini-
mal administrative cost. To complement this, registration fees and processes 
will be harmonised and reporting, tax ﬁling, and other government interac-
tions will be streamlined across the EU.
> Boost entrepreneurship and the creation of jobs, by scaling up invest-
ments in technologies such as blockchain, big data, artiﬁcial intelligence and 
cloud technologies to help Europe's strategic sectors to compete globally.
Create Jobs
Entrepre-
neurship
No One Left 
Behind
4
#2
The Amsterdam Declaration          www.volteuropa.org


The world economy is undergoing major transformations, resulting in both opportunities and chal-
lenges for the continent. Europe needs to lead by example when it comes to the future of work, 
sustainability, competitiveness, and wellbeing. To this end, it is crucial for Europe to develop its 
research and innovation capacities. Amongst all technological developments to come, artiﬁcial 
intelligence is to be the most disruptive; Europe needs to be at the forefront of exploring its future 
potential. 
> Ensure European excellence in the future by doubling the spending on 
Research and Development to 4% of EU GDP by 2025. Push countries to 
invest in innovation to master the environmental and social challenges of 
tomorrow.
> Become smart in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, by creating the EU High Level Arti-
ﬁcial Intelligence Coordination Oﬃce to gather the best minds and businesses 
in the ﬁeld, set up a European AI Initiative, and establish high ethical standards 
for AI. 
> Make Artiﬁcial Intelligence available and accessible for everyone, by 
increasing the European Investment Bank’s support for AI investments to at 
least €1 billion a year by 2020, and by setting up a centralised “AI-on-demand-
platform” to provide a single access point to key AI resources in the EU.
> Protect the dignity and safety of workers, especially in new sectors. Pro-
vide workers with non-traditional long-term contracts (e.g., gig, platform, free-
lance) with standards of protection comparable to those applicable to tradi-
tional forms of work.
> Create ﬂexible workplaces via an EU-wide Working Time Choice Act, 
enabling workers and employers to negotiate ﬂexible forms of work that 
reﬂect the needs of the individual, the team, and the business. 
> Prepare the European labour force for the challenges of tomorrow, by 
setting up the European Sector Skills Council to research the skills needed in 
the future. This will enhance synergies between the private and public sector.
Innovation
Future of 
Work
5
#2
The Amsterdam Declaration          www.volteuropa.org
Make Europe an 
Economic Powerhouse
by investing in the future


For Europe to reach its full potential, the education of its citizens must be a core priority. Education 
allows for the creation and sharing of knowledge, which enhances both mutual understanding and 
social cohesion. Volt wants to upgrade education from an early age duty to a lifelong companion, 
while improving the learning of formal and informal skills, and their recognition across Europe. This 
will ensure citizens stay employed and ﬁnd better suited jobs.
> Enable more people to experience diﬀerent European countries, by 
increasing the budget for EU exchange programmes (ERASMUS+), especially 
for secondary school students, apprentices and disadvantaged students. 
> Make sure that everyone can keep up with a rapidly evolving society, by 
extending lifelong learning to all, throughout their professional and personal 
lives.
> Bring education to the next level, by increasing EU funding for teachers, 
school teachers, and introducing new teaching methods. This will adequately 
address how diﬀerent students learn best and enhance their educational 
success..
> Establish the EU “Volta Programme”, that will provide comprehensive 
ﬁnancial support for all training activities, including the reskilling and upskill-
ing of people. 
> Make it easier to study and work anywhere in Europe, by increasing the 
transparency and recognition of knowledge, skills, and competences.
> Increase the focus on digital literacy for all ages, by starting online educa-
tion and coding at an early age, by introducing respective life-long learning and 
vocational trainings, and by emphasizing mental health and social well-being in 
digital environments.
Education
The “Volta 
Programme”
6
#2
The Amsterdam Declaration          www.volteuropa.org
Make Europe an 
Economic Powerhouse
by putting education ﬁrst


Europe must be at the forefront of a green economic transformation to reap its beneﬁts and lead 
the ﬁght against climate change. The world only has 12 years left to ﬁght climate change and fulﬁll 
the Paris Climate Agreement. For this to happen, the shift towards sustainability needs to be much 
faster and bolder than it is today. While the EU cannot address global challenges alone, it can and 
should lead the way in trying to reduce the immediate and future eﬀects of climate change and set 
an example for other regions. Only then will it be able to position itself in the green industries of 
the future.
> Support sustainable agriculture, by refocusing the Common Agricultural 
Policy away from larger producers and towards smaller producers that use eco-
logical approaches.
> Increase product quality and biodiversity, by supporting farms that 
manage land in accordance with local ecosystems, by focusing on connecting 
natural habitats, and by banning the use of pesticides and neonicotinoids.
> Grow the green economy, by introducing an EU-wide carbon tax and other 
forms of carbon pricing along the entire production chain and by ending subsi-
dies on fossil-based fuel. The funds gained will be used for relevant climate 
mitigation and adaptation projects and to create new jobs.
> Use energy in a smarter way, by introducing smart electricity grids, by 
setting more ambitious energy-saving targets, and by creating incentives for 
green and low-energy public transportation.
> Truly kick-start the circular economy, by stimulating the provision of goods 
and services that are renewable and sustainable. This will be done by harmo-
nizing tax incentives, speeding up the regulatory processes and providing 
funds to rethink the design and digitalisation of organisations, goods and 
services.
> Stop plastic-based pollution and reduce waste in general, by taxing the 
use of plastic, single-use products and polluted recyclables, and by banning 
the export of waste into non-EU countries.
> Move towards sustainable consumption and government spending, by 
introducing a Circular Economy Label, by adopting a green public procurement 
standard and by supporting resource sharing and product longevity.
Smart 
Energy
Circular 
economy
Sustainable 
agriculture
7
#3
The Amsterdam Declaration          www.volteuropa.org
Build a just and 
sustainable society
by seizing the green opportunities


The EU is undergoing a political crisis in its management of migration ﬂows. Undoubtedly, the refu-
gee crisis is a political crisis. Europe has a legal and moral responsibility to help, it has the capacity 
to absorb refugee ﬂows, and Volt will turn this into opportunities for everyone. Accommodating a 
diverse group of labour migrants into the European labour market can contribute to both the wel-
fare of European countries and that of the migrants’ home countries. 
> Manage refugee ﬂows from outside the EU, by setting up a Uniﬁed EU 
Refugee System. The Dublin System must be reformed and complemented by 
a settlement scheme which provides for penalties and sanctions against States 
refusing to fulﬁl their responsibility. 
> Make the asylum system fair, eﬀective and quick, by issuing EU guidelines 
that ensure shorter asylum procedures and provide for social, legal and 
psychological support.
> Ensure successful integration and a beneﬁt for the economy. Asylum 
seekers must be able to enter the job market from day one, and their skills 
must be more easily recognised. In addition, language training must be 
oﬀered to all asylum seekers.
> Uphold asylum seekers’ and refugees’ rights, by monitoring and sanction-
ing Member States who breach these rights, e.g., by detaining asylum seekers 
when unnecessary and under inhumane conditions.
> Protect those in need, by classifying famine and climate migrants as refu-
gees under European law and by strengthening the use of humanitarian corri-
dors.
> Protect both domestic and foreign workers against the negative eﬀects 
of economic migration, by applying minimal harmonization among all Euro-
pean countries ensuring that access to basic social, legal and medical services 
is guaranteed.
> Turn Europe into a talent and innovation hub, by making it simpler and 
more attractive to obtain an expert visa, especially after acquiring a university 
degree from an EU Member State.
> Increase legal pathways into Europe, by developing a speciﬁc visa that will 
be made available to temporary foreign workers.
> Ensure that countries of origin and European countries beneﬁt from tem-
porary economic migration, by aligning the interest of both and by involving 
all relevant stakeholders (e.g., employers and trade unions) in the policy 
making process.
Asylum 
Seekers and 
Refugees
Labour 
migration
8
#3
The Amsterdam Declaration          www.volteuropa.org
Build a just and 
sustainable society
by managing migration 
humanely and responsibly


People are still subject to discrimination and social exclusion because of their gender, sexuality, 
disability, appearance, origin, or beliefs. The EU needs to adopt a comprehensive approach, seek-
ing to end all forms of discrimination. Everyone has to be guaranteed equal rights and opportuni-
ties, and human rights need to be respected, applied, and upheld. Let’s make Europe equal by 
2025!
> Make housing aﬀordable, by integrating social and shared housing into the 
EU cohesion policy. Use available funds for social housing to improve the situa-
tion of low income groups, including marginalised groups, and urge Member 
States to subsidise shared social living.
> Alleviate child poverty, by implementing a minimum standard for universal 
child beneﬁts across the EU.
> Break the glass ceiling, by legally enforcing representation of women on  
publicly-listed corporate boards by 2025 and requiring businesses to report on 
gender pay and gender balance.
> Ensure that women’s rights are upheld, by legalizing and providing access 
to free abortion until the end of the ﬁrst trimester, and providing free contra-
ception everywhere across Europe.
> Guarantee equal rights to all, by ensuring access to the same procedures, 
rights and unions to every individual in society, including marriage for all.
> End police violence and discriminatory treatment of minorities, by provid-
ing police training and revising laws, ending biased persecution and ensuring 
that the justice system does not discriminate against minorities.
> Aim for full equality and diversity for underrepresented groups in the 
public sector in Member States and in EU institutions, by putting in place 
preferential treatment, reporting on diversity and accommodating special 
needs.
> Ensure equal gender representation in EU politics and encourage female
participation, by having gender-alternate lists of candidates and by other 
means, such as mandatory reporting on gender representation.
Equality & 
Anti-
Discrimination
Public Sector
Inclusion
9
#3
The Amsterdam Declaration          www.volteuropa.org
Build a sustainable
and just society
by pushing for fairness and equality




