Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
Brussels 2040 - Volt Belgium Electoral
Program for the Brussels Regional Parliament
Elections
Context and Background
After a grassroots idea gathering phase in autumn 2022 where both Volt-members
as well external citizens could submit any idea to become an electoral priority in the
2024 election, we organised a democratic preferendum in December 2022 to choose
our top 10 electoral priorities.
After the preferendum, a team of more than 30
Volt-members, internal and external experts and citizens co-drafted the specific
texts for the main priorities and sub-priorities chosen in our preferendum. Those
specific texts were then discussed at events and at our general assembly back in
April 2023 in Namur where we formally voted on the final texts. Therefore, the texts
presented here are already officially adopted as our 2024 electoral program. In the
upcoming months there will still be an amendment phase for minor corrections,
without changing the main priorities chosen in the democratic preferendum.
Contact: policy@voltbelgium.org


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
Electoral Priority 1: investments in green
and resilient infrastructure
If Brussels, Belgium and Europe want to be both economically and ecologically prosperous 15 years from
now, and we want to have healthy livable environmental conditions in our regions and cities, we have to
accelerate and increase investments in sustainable and resilient infrastructure.
Climate
Legislation
is
Infrastructure
Legislation:
We
build
down
climate emissions via positive
infrastructure investments to make Europe climate neutral by 2040. The transport sector is the only sector in
Europe where emissions increased instead of decreasing in the last decades. Sustainable infrastructure such as
Rail Infrastructure can address climate, jobs and equity at the same time and allows for climate neutrality and
economic growth to co-exist. Infrastructure, such as rail, connects people. Further, we expand investments in
national and cross-border electricity grids (elaborated on in Electoral Priority 4: Energy Transition).
When we decide to make an investment in infrastructure, we have to make the investments that not just help our
generation, but the next generation and two and three generations from now. We have to be stewards of the
economy, the environment and our health. We have to make sure the air we breathe is clean, that the water we
drink is clean and that the future of our children is more sustainable, more prosperous and more inclusive than
the reality of today.
Flanders and Europe need the best and most sustainable infrastructure in the world to become an economic
powerhouse: For this we must significantly accelerate its investments in infrastructure, especially sustainable
infrastructure. Belgium must modernise and revolutionise its transportation, energy, and communication
networks to remain competitive.
Infrastructure Connects People : Infrastructure promotes social inclusion and equity. From railways to
communication networks to energy grids, infrastructure enables the movement of goods, services, and
information that drives economic growth and development. Investing in modern and sustainable infrastructure,
including railway transportation like night trains or high-speed rail and communication networks like 5G, can help
us create more connected and resilient communities. By providing fast and reliable connectivity, both offline and
online, we can connect people and communities across borders, promote the exchange of ideas and knowledge,
and support new technologies that can improve people's lives.


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
Main
Proposal
1:
Revolutionise
Pedestrian
and
Cycling
infrastructure.
We recognise the work done by the current Brussels administration, which resulted in cyclists count more than
doubling between 2019 and 2022. Let’s be realistic, however: Brussels is not yet a bicycle city, and many of
the solutions of the current administration were poorly designed and executed, and lacking on aspects like
cyclists’ comfort and safety. It’s time for a more accelerated change and time to look better to European Best
Practices such as real bicycle cities like Utrecht in the Netherlands.
Figure: (Left) N3a between Maalbeek and Kunst-wet. 3 big lanes for cars in one direction. 2 very small lanes for
cyclists. (Right) Kroonlaan in Etterbeek/Elsene without any cycling infrastructure.
We need to think out of the box and reject outdated standards that prioritise cars over people. We want to
transform Brussels from a king city for automobilists to the queen city for pedestrians and cyclists. Taking away
road lanes and converting them to bicycle lanes, and expanded car-low and car-free zones in the city can help us
achieve this goal. Studies have shown that such changes can lead to reduced congestion, air pollution and fewer
traffic fatalities. Reduced congestion will also hugely benefit automobilists, and reduce air pollution as well: also
people driving a car breathe our air and become sick and hospitalised due to traffic related air pollution.
Build it and the cyclists come! We propose building over 50 kilometres of at least 4-metre wide bicycle lanes
in the Brussels area between 2025 and 2030 and 100 kilometres by 2040. This will give cyclists the space they
need to move around safely and sustainably. By investing in new bicycle infrastructure, we can also reduce the
number of adults and children who rely on cars for transportation, sometimes because they deem cycling unsafe
or unhealthy due to air pollution.
Too many pedestrians and cyclists die on our roads, often after collisions caused by automobilists. Too many
adults and children make (ironically) use of a car because they deem Brussels not safe enough to cycle. Too many


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
adults and children (ironically) use a car because they deem the air they breathe in
Brussels too polluted and unhealthy to cycle in.
But we can’t forget about pedestrians. We need to expand sidewalks and redesign streets to prioritise and
separate pedestrians and cyclists. This will create a more pleasant and enjoyable walking neighbourhood for
everyone.
Broad bicycle lanes in Utrecht - picture © Urban cycling Institute (Left), Gemeente Utrecht (right)
Funding: The congestion tax (see Electoral Priority 2) we will introduce, will gather an additional revenue of 0,5
billion euros/year or € 7,5 billion over the next 15 years for the Brussels region. We propose to spend € 2,5 billion
into bicycle infrastructure during the next 15 years in addition to the already allocated and planned budget.
Main Proposal 2: Expand the Metro network in Brussels. Where not feasible, surface
trams or RER-like systems/S-trains should be built as an alternative.
To meet WHO recommendations on physical activity, air pollution, noise and green space accessibility levels, we
don’t only have to massively increase our bicycle and pedestrian infrastructure, but also improve public
transportation, and especially urban rail transport.
Urban rail transport has a higher potential for attracting passengers than buses and therefore we must focus on
developing a robust urban rail transportation network that not only benefits our generation but the next
generations to come.


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
The proposed metro network in this article of L’Echo we see as an idealistic end goal to
strive for. We want to clarify however that the technical feasibility of some of the lines may not be very good and
we prioritise the construction of new metro lines with a robust technical feasibility and the highest
passenger volume potentials. In places where it seems not feasible or extremely difficult to build the metro
lime, a surface tram or RER-like system can be explored as an alternative.
In addition to the internal urban rail network of Brussels, we also propose to improve connectivity to other
regions in Belgium. For example, we want a rail solution (metro line, tram or light rail) from Brussels to Leuven
via Tervuren. One of the options is to expand metro line 5 from Herman-Debroux to Leuven via Tervuren and
Bertem. This also creates massive sustainable housing opportunities on this axis between Leuven and Brussels
and can upgrade those regions. If the expansion of metro 5 to Leuven seems not feasible, then we should opt for
a tram or light rail connection.
Figure: The Metro solution discussed in the article of L’echo. We see this as an idealistic end goal, but want to
prioritise lines with the highest passenger volume, modal shift potentials and robust technical feasibility.
Funding: The congestion tax (see Electoral Priority 2) we will introduce, will gather an additional revenue of 0,5
billion euros/year or € 7,5 billion over the next 15 years. We propose to spend € 5 billion into metro and other


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
urban rail infrastructure during the next 15 years in addition to the already allocated
and planned budget. In addition, we ask for co-funding from other regional governments, the national
government, the European Commission and the private sector.
Main Proposal 3: Resilient and sustainable water infrastructure to mitigate droughts
and floods
Scientific research demonstrates that the single most effective measure to reduce both droughts and floods is to
reduce the percentage of concrete surface. This will foster percolation of the water to the lower water tables.
This enables to increase the water reserve in periods of droughts (much more than reducing water consumption)
and also increases the amount of rainwater infiltrating, reducing the risk of floods. This should be thoroughly
reflected in all infrastructure projects.
In cities, reducing space for parkings and cars, and in rural areas converting more agricultural land to forests, as
well stimulating people to have grassland and trees as much as possible on their domain are specific measures on
how to reach this goal
The Regional government should start with awareness campaigns to raise the importance of infiltration for
mitigating both drought and floods.
In addition, existing water infrastructure, such as rivers, canals and dams, should be made more resilient and
flexible to deal with more extreme flooding and drought circumstances. Specifically for Brussels, we investigate
the possibilities to open up underground parts of the Zenne river to the surface in a green pedestrianised
atmosphere, following best European practices of Ghent and Utrecht.


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
Electoral Priority 2: Mobility and Public
Transport
The issue of traffic congestion and its negative impact on society is a growing concern in many
regions, and Brussels is no exception. The excessive use of cars not only leads to financial losses and
traffic incidents but also contributes to poor air quality and urban sprawl. To address these
challenges, the government/region must reevaluate its mobility plan and shift towards more
sustainable and eco-friendly modes of transportation. Alongside affordable public transport and
better operational management of existing train and public transport systems, building more
bicycle lanes and facilitating bicycle sharing, 24/7 urban public transport, electric car sharing
systems, congestion pricing, and monthly car-free Sundays are essential elements in the mix. By
embracing a more holistic approach to mobility, Brussels can create more livable and sustainable
cities, reduce costs, and drive economic growth, all while improving the health and well-being of its
citizens.
Main Proposal 1: 24/7 affordable public urban rail transport in Brussels &
suburbs
(1) Implementing the success of European best practices in Brussels. Brussels can still learn a lot to
further improve its public transport system. In Copenhagen Metro runs 24/7 and in Prague trams
run 24/7. While there is a night network of buses within Brussels, expanding operating metro hours
of the tram or metro system to 24/7 offers considerably increased comfort for passengers,
providing us as citizens more freedom while cutting carbon and pollution emissions by generating a
modal shift. In the first instance, we propose, similar to Prague, to make the tram network operate
24/7 with an option to extend this to the metro system after technical feasability analysis.
(2) We want existing public transportation to be affordable. For “De Lijn”, “MIVB” and “TEC” we
propose 4 categories of passes: hourly passes of €1, daypasses of €3, monthly passes of € 15 and
annual passes of € 150.. We want to keep the reduced € 12 tariff for local public transport in
Brussels for young people and elderly. We also work together with all transportation companies to
establish a cross-company pass that is valid in the entirety of Belgium. An annual national rail pas is
available for €250, and a combined rail pass for national railways and local transport within Brussels
for € 350 annually


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
Main Proposal 2:
Increased rollout of bicycle-sharing
systems and electric-car-sharing systems.
(1) We stimulate bike ownership and at the federal level we take measures to reduce bicycle costs,
by reducing VAT to 0% for bike purchases and bike maintenance. In addition, it should be very easy
and convenient to get a bicycle in other places where you don’t live, without taking your own bike.
We incentivise bicycle-sharing systems in all cities with more than 50K inhabitants and to improve
existing systems to make them more user-friendly. This could be integrated into services of
regional/ local public transport operators.
(2) Support and Expand Electric-Car-Sharing Systems. A private car is parked 23 hours a day and
can stimulate unnecessary car use.It also absorbs during all these hours, parking space which is
scarce public space. We need to shift to electric-car-sharing systems. One shared car takes 5 to 12
privately-owned cars from the road, because being part of a car-sharing system will reduce
car-overuse, while being convenient and affordable.
No more worrying about maintenance,
insurance or parking. You can simply enjoy the ride, knowing that you’re doing your part to make
the world a better place. You might just find that a combination of cycling, public transportation
and electric car sharing systems are the perfect match for you.and much more convenient that it
may see at first hand. Of course, at first those systems are more feasible in urban and suburban
areas, and residential cores of smaller municipalities and not in remote rural areas. That’s where we
want to start with it.
Main Proposal 3: Congestion charges in cities with an urban rail network.
We propose a congestion charge of €2.5 per hour for the inner city center of Brussels, Ghent,
Antwerp and Charleroi, with a 90% discount for residents living within these areas, so they will
barely pay anything (e.g. to do groceries) within their neighborhood. The charge will discourage
individuals from outside the city from using a car, and encourage the use of public transport or park
and ride options. No registration is needed and once-a-month billing will be handled automatically
through technical solutions (e.g. ANPR cameras).
The successful implementation of congestion charge zones in London, Stockholm, and Gothenburg
led to significant reductions in traffic congestion, air pollution, and improvements in public


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
transportation usage. For example, in London, the congestion charge zone
resulted in a 30% decrease in traffic congestion, 38% increase in public transport use, considerable
increases in walking and cycling, a decrease of traffic collisions and fatalities by 40 per month and a
decrease in air pollution by over 25%. This is resulting in lower healthcare and social security costs
for taxpayers due to less sick leave, medication, and hospitalisations for conditions such as heart
attacks, cancer, and asthma exacerbations.
This proposal will generate a minimum of €500 million annually, which will be stored into a lock box
and allocated to improve bicycle, urban rail, and light rail infrastructure. An independent panel of
experts, scientists and citizens can choose new sustainable transport projects for which the money
can be used.
The goal is to reduce the negative health effects of road transport while also benefiting car drivers
with reduced congestion and travel times.
Main Proposal 4: Volt proposes to implement a monthly car-free Sunday in
all Belgian cities with a population of > 50 000 inhabitants
We propose monthly car-free Sundays in all Belgian cities with population > 50k to promote healthy,
livable cities and create awareness of environmental and health burdens of car dependency.
Traffic-related air pollution can be reduced by 50-80% on car-free Sundays compared to average
Sundays, leading to public health and environmental benefits such as increased physical activity and
less space occupation by cars. It also boosts the local economy and provides joyful activities and
events. Pedestrians and cyclists can enjoy the city more than ever, traveling on roads that are
otherwise dangerous and difficult to cross. On a car-free Sunday, large parts of cities can be
transformed from places where people only want to pass through to places where people actually
love being.
In addition, car-free Sundays can strongly boost the local economy. Free public
transport should be available on car-free Sundays. Gradual evolution towards the end goal can start
with progressing from zero or one car-free Sunday per year to one car-free sunday per season or
each month during spring and summer. A corrective referendum can be organised at the local level
12 months after implementation of monthly car-free Sundays to confirm or reject continuing with
the proposal, as research shows higher support after implementation, people should first
experience the situation before making a final decision.


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
Electoral Priority 3: Tax Justice
Main proposal 1: Introduction of the job bonus in Brussels
Currently in Flanders, the job bonus is an annual bonus of max € 600/year for people earning below
2500 EUR bruto. We expand this currently Flemish system to Brussels and Wallonia. We want to
increase the job bonus to max € 1000 / year and make it eligible for everyone with a net salary
below 3500 EUR (bruto), with gradual steps (the lower the income, the higher the bonus).
This proposal can become self-financing because it’s part of our plan to increase the activity rate of
the Belgian population as much as possible. The purpose of the proposal is
In addition, we support the plans to oblige people between jobs who are still jobless after a period
of 12 months to do community work 12 hours a week. This community work can also be in private
companies: we will develop a platform where private and public companies can request community
workers. Community work for 12 hours a week still allows them to spend considerable time on
finding a real permanent job. In certain cases, if the jobless person can demonstrate they are
following educational courses for more than 12 hours/week that will help them by finding a next
job, the community work can be reduced from 12 to 6 hours per week during maximum 24 months.
Main Proposal 2:
Increased efforts against corruption, fiscal fraud, tax
evasion and social fraud.
The issue of fiscal and social fraud in Belgium is one that affects us all. Every year, the government
loses billions of euros in revenue due to fraudulent activity. For fiscal fraud alone, this is estimated
to cost more than 30 billion euro annually (1). It is time that we take a stand and tackle this problem
head-on. The funds lost to fraud could be used to improve our communities, invest in education,
invest in infrastructure, rail and public transport, lower taxes on labor and have a more fair tax
system for everyone and provide essential services to those in need.
Most of the fiscal fraud
combating efforts have to be done on the federal level, but also The regions can do their part
combating social fraud and other forms of fraud that are (partially) their responsibility.


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
Main Proposal 3: Reduce avoidable diseases & deaths from pollution &
behavioural factors
Wood stoves and cars have a billion-euro societal cost per year. For cars, it exceeds € 20 billion per
year (environmental costs + congestion) and for wood stoves it’s estimated to be €2,6 billion per
year.
For cars, we propose congestion charging and Low Emission Zones (LEZ) in cities, supporting the
expansion of LEZ in Brussels. By 2035, we will phase out the sale of fossil fuel and hybrid cars in line
with the EU proposal. Reducing car use remains vital for ecological, health, and economic benefits.
Regarding wood stoves, we propose mandatory registration to create a data-driven inventory.
From 2025 to 2035, only modern pellet stoves with a <1g/hour particulate matter limit will be
allowed in Brussels (checked by real-practice tests to avoid a second Dieselgate scandal). By 2035,
no new wood stoves will be permitted due to alternative, eco-friendlier heating options.
We advocate for regional and EU cooperation to tackle pollution that transcends borders. In
addition, Local communities can take action against high PM2.5 or NO2 levels. Our goal is to meet
WHO air pollution guidelines of 5 µg/m³ PM 2.5 exposure and 10 µg/m³ NO2 exposure.
Additionally, city mobility policies should promote active transport and physical activity to combat
obesity. We recommend cautious permitting of fast-food chains near schools and stimulate
incentives for healthy food environments.
Main Proposal 4: Boosting the Circular Economy in the regions
The circular economy envisions a resource-efficient society inspired by nature, where waste from
one ecosystem becomes a resource for another. This system, though sometimes wasteful, fosters
abundance and resilience. Our response to the Covid crisis highlights the need for effectiveness
over efficiency. We should embrace this model as the world grows more volatile, treating
economies as ecosystems, not linear machines, to avoid past mistakes.


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
This policy aims to create the infrastructure for circular economic ecosystems in Belgium.
Governments can't do this alone but can facilitate conditions. We propose a Circularity Grading
System for all for-profit activities, starting with large corporations, then SMEs, and finally small
businesses. Companies self-assess and have years to improve their grade; non-compliance results in
a progressive circularity tax. Close collaboration with the EU is essential.
To encourage innovation and entrepreneurship in the circular economy, we propose state-backed
bank loans of €500k -> €3M for startups and companies contributing to circularity. This ambitious
subsidy program will be funded by the circularity tax mentioned earlier.
Electoral Priority 4: Energy Transition
It is universally accepted that transitioning away from fossil fuels is vital for the future of humanity
and indeed the world as we know it. Volt proposes a pragmatic approach based on a combination of
nuclear energy and renewable energies, with the latter taking a growing portion of our energy
production over the years.
This will achieve the following three objectives:
1) Protection of the environment - The climate is rapidly changing and requires a transition to
sources of clean energy that do not produce greenhouse gas, directly or indirectly, especially
if Belgium is going to play an active role in reaching the Paris Agreement targets.
2) Affordability for everyone - Everyone should be able to have access to affordable energy
to cater for their basic needs. This means developing means for governments, in particular
the Belgian government, to control prices. We believe that this will be possible by regulating
consumption, developing storage and efficient usage mechanisms.


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
3) Security of energy supplies - Belgium needs to ensure as much energetic security
as
possible. A balance between foreign policy, EU policies and national policies has to be found.
As a pan-european party Volt can contribute to find the right balance. At the same time it
needs to contribute to a more favourable EU energy sharing policy.
Mechanisms to reduce fluctuations in the production and the consumption of energy should
be developed. This will require the private and public sectors to adapt. The Belgian
government needs to step in and ensure this transition is done swiftly yet smoothly.
Regarding Nuclear Energy, whih is elaborated in our energy proposals for the federal election, Volt
Belgium proposes to keep existing nuclear reactors operational as long as it is safe and feasible, as
it guarantees energy independence, is resource-efficient, emits no CO2 or harmful emissions, and
has a stable cost structure. We want to repeal the law that forbids future nuclear energy and create
a new legislative framework for nuclear power that promotes recycling of spent fuel, contributes
more to the federal budget for R&D, and commits to a long-term strategy for radioactive waste at a
European level. These are core proposals for the federal energy policy, while this document will
focus on the proposal for regional energy policy.
Main
proposal
1:
More
solar
&
wind
energy,
especially
where
space-efficient
Belgium should support the deployment of infrastructure necessary for the production of low CO2
renewable energy, in collaboration with other EU countries. It should actively contribute to the
establishment of an EU-based supply-chain of equipment necessary for the production of
renewable energies in Europe. The current dependency on manufacturers located outside the EU


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
makes Belgium and other EU countries vulnerable to geopolitical tensions. In
addition, we can bring the manufacturing of the new green infrastructure into the EU. This would
allow Belgium and the EU to apply higher standards, thus significantly lowering the carbon
footprint of the renewable energy supply chain. And this would create jobs in Europe.
Belgium should further contribute to the European energy supply through the accelerated
development of wind farms, both in-land and off-shore. Hydraulic energy (Hydro-power) should be
further developed, and solar panels should be used for private dwellings as well as industrial
complexes. Belgian industries and households should also adapt so that the energy consumption is
concentrated when there is an excess of production.
Main Proposal 2: A better integrated energy grid for Belgium and it’s
regions within the EU and internationally
Volt believes that it is essential to further integrate the Belgian grid with the European electricity
grid, in order to ensure a stable supply of energy thanks to various sources. A pan-European
approach is indeed essential as it is in many other domains. In order to guarantee the provision of
energy a given supplier should not cover more than 10% of the total demand.
Investments should be directed towards the rapid development of sources of renewable energy
and storage technology (such as hydrogen) in Europe. If it involves poorer nations, the energy
supply should be linked to their economic development, to avoid any new risk of exploitation. This
could apply for instance to solar farms in Africa.
Volt believes that economic and societal development will only be possible if stable energy supply
and consumption are achieved in a sustainable manner. This is why Volt wants to maintain the
production of nuclear energy in order to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. It also intends to


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
massively invest in renewable energy and storage technologies. This is only
achievable through integration of supply and demand at a European level. Volt believes that
Belgium can play an important role thanks to its central location. Future generations across Europe
are counting on us to lay the foundation for a better and more sustainable future.
In addition, we want to prolong the operation of existing nuclear power plants and repeal the
law that forbids future nuclear power. As this is a federal competency, those policies are
comprehensively discussed in the federal electoral program.
Electoral Priority 5: Education
For Volt, education is the tool of choice to promote social mobility and inclusion and to foster a
united and dynamic democracy based on open, pluralistic societies. Society needs well educated
and empowered people of all kinds for it to function well. Education is therefore not only a ‘right’
for individuals but also an ‘obligation’ society owes itself to organize it in the best possible way. To
ensure that schools are inspiring, safe, ready for the modern world, attractive, and stimulating
workplaces for all students, Volt believes that education in Belgium should focus on fighting
inequality, promoting innovative teaching approaches and empowering teachers to make this
happen. Although Belgium invests heavily in education compared to most European countries,
performance inequality amongst students, schools and regions is high and increasing. Volt wants to
fight for equalized learning opportunities with a set of evidence based proposals. Moreover, we are
convinced that the fragmentation of education along ideological lines hinders the adoption of
innovative and transformative teaching approaches as implemented successfully in some other


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
European countries. Finally, such transition is only possible if teachers feel more
supported, empowered and valorized in their job.
Thus, Volt Belgium Education policy program is divided in 3 thematic blocks:
❖Equalize learning opportunities in education
❖Empower teachers in their profession
❖Promote transformative teaching
Main Proposal 1: Equalize learning opportunities in education
Situation: The impact of poverty on school results in Belgium is considerably high. The OECD, in
their PISA reports, have for years pointed out that Belgium has one of the highest levels of
education inequality of all OECD countries. By the time they are 15, children from the poorest 25%
of families lag 3 years behind their rich peers from the top 25%. To combat inequality stretching
over generations we have three concrete proposals.
Our proposals to reduce educational inequality:
●
Supply free lunches at school: Providing free lunches at school helps to ensure that all
students have access to a healthy diet, which is an important factor for their physical and
cognitive development. We would like to achieve this through more governmental funding, in
cooperation with the various educational networks and by promoting partnerships with local
organizations and/or businesses. Other measures to improve school meals include offering a
variety of healthy food options, promoting nutrition education, and involving students in menu
planning.
●
Cut school bills for families living in poverty: We propose to cut school bills for families
living below the poverty line (€2,868 per month for a family with two adults and two children).
This will especially have an impact on families with children going to secondary schools, where
yearly bills pile up to €1300 on average. Currently it falls on schools themselves to keep their


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
bills payable, resulting in forcing them to cut expenses. This is detrimental
to extramural activities and (cultural) events. Thus, inequality is bad for all students.
●
Increase digitalization - no child left behind: The lack of digital access and skills among some
school-aged children and parents is leaving them behind.
We aim at expanding affordable
internet access for households with school-aged children through regulations in partnership
with ISPs (internet service providers), ensuring that all students have access to a device with
updated software, either through leasing, private purchase, joint purchases, or reuse of PCs.
Preserve and enhance the increased use of online streaming for students unable to attend
in-person classes, as was implemented during the Covid pandemic.
●
Reduce school dropout: High dropout rates lead to a less educated and skilled workforce,
which has negative consequences for the economy and the society. To reduce dropout rates,
we want to provide more academic support and tutoring to struggling students, offer
alternative education options such as vocational training or online learning, and address the
root causes of dropout such as poverty, bullying, or mental health issues.
Additionally, we think it is time to challenge the traditional ways of schooling. Not all children
succeed in a system focused on theoretical learning. This results in them dropping out of
school at the age of 18, without a degree. Thus we must make sure that alternative courses
(e.g. VDAB courses) are also available, known and respected as options. Similar to Germany or
Switzerland, vocational training should be seen as a valuable choice.
●
Make tutoring more affordable for those in need: Volt wants to make tutoring after school
hours available and more affordable, especially for students in a financially difficult situation
who cannot afford private tutoring. We cannot expect parents to be experts in all school
subjects. Having students fall behind in the classroom also puts teachers under pressure. They
will be forced to either take on extra workload (for free), slow down their pace or give up on
some students. Although we want to encourage teachers (financially) to take up the role of
after school tutor, we cannot expect them to do this on their own and we want to make sure
that the means are available to hire additional staff.
●
Increase support to schools with a high concentration of students in need: It is important to
strengthen schools that have a higher concentration of students with extra needs. We want to
encourage teachers to apply for jobs in schools situated within lower income neighborhoods by


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
offering them a bonus. This has been done successfully in Amsterdam,
where teachers receive a bonus and an 8% increase in salary if they choose a school with a high
number of students that need extra help. We must, however, make sure that disadvantaged
students do not suffer further setbacks because of a lack of teachers and to show that teachers
choosing to take on a more challenging job are valued.
●
Expand
free
preschool
&
kindergarten:
Children
from
disadvantaged
backgrounds,
particularly those that do not speak the language of their school education at home, benefit
from an earlier start in pre-school. Research shows that an earlier start in education reduces
school dropouts and inequality in the future
has positive effects on social behavior (OECD
PISA). Since the cost of pre-school is already low and there are financial incentives to encourage
school attendance, we need to look at other incentives to encourage parents to enroll their
children at a lower age. We want to Increase enrollment in preschool, particularly for children
from
disadvantaged backgrounds by providing free preschool for children from low
socio-economic families, including a free lunch, and engage with parents to promote the
benefits of preschool.
●
Enhance lifelong learning: Volt is a firm believer that education is crucial for personal and
professional growth and places a strong emphasis on the value of lifelong learning. The goal is
to create a more skilled workforce and a stronger economy by fostering a culture of ongoing
education. This is particularly important for individuals who did not have access to quality
education in their youth. By promoting lifelong learning, Volt seeks to reduce poverty and
create a more equitable and inclusive society. However, in Belgium, only 20% of working adults
participate in additional training, which is lower compared to similar countries. We propose
investing in lifelong learning by making educational opportunities more financially and
time-wise accessible and equitable for adults through institutions such as universities, technical
schools, and community centers. Empower unemployed or underemployed individuals by
offering education and training opportunities instead of punishment. Existing lifelong learning
opportunities should be better promoted, as there exist various (often affordable) lifelong
learning opportunities at universities, language institutes and other institutions, but many of
those initiatives are not well known.


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
●
Increase cooperation between the public and the catholic education
systems: Since both systems are partially funded by the government, this proposal aims at
cutting costs by improving efficiency to fund a portion of the policies that focus on reducing
educational inequality.
Main proposal 2: Empower teachers in their profession
Situation: The success of education policies lies in the valorization of the teaching profession. A
focus on the career development and support of teachers is crucial for improving education
outcomes. By prioritizing teacher training and making higher education more suitable for teacher
formation, we can ensure that teachers have the knowledge and skills necessary to effectively
educate future generations. Only by valuing the important role teachers play in education, the
policies proposed will be effective in creating a successful education system.
Our proposals to increase teacher's satisfaction:
●
Reinforce teachers as the actors of change within education: It is important to give teachers
agency, as the current problem with schools being too focussed on the ‘as is’ - performance
level of students' is not effective, according to observers who cite this as the reason for the low
academic standards. Moreover, they oppose the idea of schools resembling private entities as
schools are fundamentally different from companies.
●
Make teachers' jobs more flexible: We propose to reform the current systems that benefit
part-time working into a fluent scale of salary, that rewards doing more hours and make it a
free choice to do less hours for a still acceptable salary. Thus, teachers going the extra mile will
be financially rewarded. This will make the profession competitive with other fields. If the
schools are lacking qualified teachers on certain topics, this system also enables external
experts and professionals to teach for a limited number of hours besides their main profession.
●
Reform teacher training: The complaint that being a teacher is a lot of administration and
lacking freedom, starts in their training. Teachers-to-be (those attending a bachelor in teaching)
are subjected to write out multiple pages for each given hour of class. The training should help


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
trainees to get a grip on their class material, become experts in the topics
they are going to teach, and focus on practical experience in front of a classroom. This is how
to keep the love for teaching alive.
Main proposal 3: Promote transformative teaching
Situation: Society and technology have been evolving at lightning speed over the last decades and
so should education. The current educational system in Belgium though has only slowly adapted. It
is characterized by a strong fragmentation along ideological lines and a traditional approach on
teaching and testing, rooted in a 19th century vision on knowledge transfer. However, with better
understanding
of
alternative
innovative
teaching
methods
and
today’s
advancements
in
digitization, the internet and AI (such as ChatGPT), Volt believes there is an urgent need and
opportunity to fundamentally transform education in Belgium. This transformation should
contribute not only to a more meaningful experience of teaching and studying but also to society as
a whole with better educated and empowered people
Our proposals to promote transformative teaching:
●
Encourage innovative and future-oriented approaches in teaching: Some of these
teaching methods are project-based learning, peer-to-peer learning, competence-based
education, circular learning, and digital capabilities like AI and virtual teamwork. We suggest
measuring the success of schools by tracking student enrollment and dropout rates, staff
retention and professional development, and school connectivity via funding. These
innovative approaches are intended to create a more engaging and effective learning
environment, with an emphasis on critical thinking, problem-solving, and entrepreneurship.
●
Promote more critical thinking, media literacy and entrepreneurial mindset in schools:
To equip students with essential skills to thrive in the modern world, we advocate for
integrating critical thinking and media literacy, which are crucial in a society where reliable


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
sources of information are scarce and fake news is rampant.
Additionally, we want to promote the development of entrepreneurship skills, including
risk-taking and resilience to foster a success-based mindset. Finally, we suggest promoting
English as a third language to improve communication across European countries and
beyond. Together, these skills will better prepare students for success in the rapidly
changing job market.
Electoral Priority 6: Climate Change Mitigation
Climate change is one of the biggest challenges facing our modern civilization. Europe is no
exception. The European Union has already committed to reduce its greenhouse gas
emissions by at least 55% by 2030, compared to 1990 levels.1 Reaching those targets on
time will require massive efforts from all, individuals, communities, businesses and
governments. Volt Europa has set the goal of becoming climate neutral by 2040 and by such
will have to sustain key strategic policies, some of them unpopular, costly and/or even at
times controversial, over long periods of time, if we wish to reach those targets.
This exercise is all the more delicate for two other major reasons. First, there is no guarantee
that making a country ecologically sustainable and free from fossil fuel dependence will allow
people to keep a dignified and good quality of life.
It is believed that economic and ecological prosperity can go hand in hand. For instance,
investing in sustainable infrastructure, such as railways, can cut carbon emissions while at
the same time boost economic growth. But failing to find the right balance between achieving
net zero carbon emissions and making sure people continue having dignified and proper
quality of life is potentially a cause for rising populism.
Second, keeping global temperature rise under 2°C is a global effort. As of today, is it highly
unlikely that China, India and many other developing countries will engage as seriously as
Europe to reach these targets. Therefore, while Europe does its best to prepare for a fossil
fuel free world, it is imperative for Belgium to prepare for the most problematic consequences
of climate change. On the other hand, we also highly focus on climate change policies that
1 https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/policies/climate-change/paris-agreement/


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
are also beneficial for the Belgian population from other perspectives than
the climate perspective such as Public Health and Economy.
With these elements in mind, Volt Belgium’s 2024 Climate Change Mitigation Campaign
Policy is articulated around two major parts:
1. Reaching the Paris Agreement targets the smart responsible way
2. Preparing for the consequences of climate change
I.
Reaching the Paris Agreement Targets2
A. Overall Strategy
Overall, addressing climate change requires a comprehensive and multi-faceted approach,
involving not just Europe but the entire global community.
In Europe, the most important
contributors to carbon emissions
are the transportation sector
(around 25% of which 72% from
cars), energy sector (>=25%), fuel
combustion excl. Transport
(>=25%) and agriculture (10%).
In most sectors, there is a
decrease in emissions during the
last decades (however insufficient)
- except for the transportation
sector where the emissions still
increase. At the same time, forests
serve as a carbon sink.
Europe in general, and Belgium in
particular, can play a leading role in
tackling this challenge by
prioritising the following strategic points (other electoral priorities): investments in green
infrastructure, sustainable mobility, a tax structure to support circular economy and greener
consoumption patterns, a smart energy transition and creating carbon sinks, supporting
biodiversity.
2 https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/5-facts-eu-climate-neutrality/


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
B. Creating Carbon Sinks by Supporting Biodiversity in Forestry and
Agriculture
As one can see in the diagram
next by, carbon sinks can be
divided in two categories:
●
Ocean sink
●
Land sink
What is interesting to note is
that despite oceans covering
70% of the planet, they are
doing less than 50% of the
carbon sink job.


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
To think that the leftover 30%, the planet’s exposed lands, is responsible
for the other 50% of carbon sinking is wrong. It is only a small fraction of those lands that
contribute to removing CO2 from the atmosphere. These are forests, wetlands and the rich
soils filled with carbon based micro organisms who are responsible for this carbon
sequestration. Combined, they represent around 10% of our planet’s surface. Then parallel to
land sinks, there is agriculture. Agriculture is globally responsible for 80% of all deforestation,
70% of the water extracted from nature, 60% of biodiversity loss and ⅓of all greenhouse gas
emissions. In addition, we also acknowledge that for example electric cars, who drive mostly
on lithium batteries, also cause carbon emissions through deforestation for lithium mining:
this carbon emissions from electric cars are often neglected in online calculation and
comparison tools. While Electric Cars over lifetime, while taking into account the
deforestation carbon emissions, emit less than fossil fuel cars, they are far from as efficient in
reducing CO2 emissions as public transport especially railways and slow transport such as
bicycles. Lithium mining for electric cars already surpasses lithium mining for all consumer
electronics together, and the lithium mining for the batteries for electric vehicles is expected
to rise further exponentially.
Understanding that less than 10% of our planet’s surface is doing more than 50% of the job
for removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, and that agriculture is the major force
behind natural habitat degradation should help people understand how important forestry,
biodiversity and agriculture are when dealing with climate change, similar to the energy
transition itself, if not more, as countless other living creatures depend on it.3
Illustrated another way: focusing only on reducing CO2 emission, is like cleaning one’s car
only from the outside. One is forgetting to clean the inside as well. And, in a similar way,
washing the inside of your car requires different tools.
It is not only about planting trees. It is about creating ecosystems. Therefore, it is crucial to
find the right balance between two complementary policies, those that support and empower
existing natural ecosystems and those that promote new forms of agriculture.
II.
Policies
A. Supporting Smart Forestry and Natural Habitat Policies
1. The Belgium Federal Government needs to take the necessary steps for
protecting the nature of 30% of its surface. To reach this, Volt BE
proposes a national plan to ensure that:
a) By 2040, 10% of the country’s surface falls under a “Natural
Preservation Act”
(1) no human activity other than authorised and strictly
regulated:
(a) Eco-tourism
3 Note that this number is gradually shifting towards oceans as deforestations continues to grow


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
(b) Academic / educational trainings
(c) Scientific research (private or public)
b) By 2040, a minimum of 10% of the country’s surface needs to fall
under the “Sustainably Conservation of Natural Habitats Act”
(1) A series of human activities are allowed as long as they
contribute to maintaining existing ecological balances.
(a) Such activities include:
(i)
Regulated hunting
(ii)
Logging as a form of forestry maintenance
(iii)
Specific forms of agroforestry and of
agriculture
(iv)
Recreational parks
(v)
Private / public housing
(vi)
Ecotourism
c) By 2040, an additional 10% of the country’s surface needs to be
properly reforested (ecosystem re-building)
(1) This surface will to be added to the “sustainability
conserved natural habitat” category or “preserved natural
habitat” if that is achievable
(2) This surface will be pilot lands for innovative agro-forestry
projects and/or agriculture related circular economy
initiatives4
d) Reaching these targets means running a nation wide mapping of
existing natural habitats in order to identify the places where these
policies will be best applicable.
e) The carbon sequestration potential of those lands will then be
calculated and converted into a CO2 subsidy
f)
In the case of exceptional ecosystems, an additional biodiversity
subsidy will be granted to the land owner
2. In collaboration with the regional governments, eco-tourism is an activity
that is attracting more and more people every year. The regional
governments will be invited to create a complementary ecotourism
development plan, to support the federal initiatives aimed at developing
preservation and conservation areas.
4 the activity needs to have a significant measurable carbon sink element to it that is equal or superior to
preserved areas


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
Electoral Priority 7: Equal Opportunities
Main Proposal 1 Systemic Inclusion - an essential ingredient for a
healthy Belgian democracy
Our European Union is founded upon the values of Respect for human dignity, Freedom,
Democracy, Equality, Rule of law, and Respect for human rights, including those of minorities. To
realise a society built on these values, Volt is committed to advance policies that lead to Belgium
being a systematically inclusive society that offers equal opportunities for all. Systemic inclusion is
of high importance as such a society would be beneficial to all Belgians.
The importance lies in different dimensions. First off there is the ethical dimension, where we refer
to Art. 23 of The Belgian Constitution5, stating that everyone has the right to lead a life in keeping
with human dignity, as well as the Charter of Fundamental Rights6, whose purpose is to promote
human rights within the EU territory. A life of dignity is one which is fully lived, and where society
enables individuals to reach their full potential without any undue barriers.
For the social dimension we identify many consequences for not including a part of the society:
individuals who are excluded from society face increased threat to their personal security, they are
often forced into a life of crime or live in neighbourhoods with higher crime rates, disadvantaged
communities, which often face challenges such as brain drain, emigration, social conflict, expansion
of slums, instability, urban violence, divided societies, and violent conflict, etc.7
A final dimension, which we identified as equally important, is the economical one. Promotion of
social equality is sometimes perceived as very costly and not worth the benefits.8 Yet the IMF has
identified that the opportunity cost to the French economy alone is equal to 1,5% of the nation’s
GDP over 20 years.9 Furthermore, many countries that achieve relatively equal societies
demonstrate stronger economic competitiveness.10 Social inclusion can also be seen as an
opportunity cost as a diverse workforce is more creative, innovative and understands the needs of
the market better.11
Main Proposal 2 Tackling inequities in all spheres of life and policies
11 https://www.un.org/esa/socdev/documents/compilation-brochure.pdf
10 Therborn, G. (2007) Presentation. Expert Group Meeting on Creating and Inclusive Society: Practical
Strategies to Promote Social Integration. Paris, France, 10 - 13 September 2007
9 The Economic Cost of Racism – IMF F&D
8 https://www.un.org/esa/socdev/documents/compilation-brochure.pdf
7 https://www.un.org/esa/socdev/documents/compilation-brochure.pdf
6
https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government_in_ireland/european_government/eu_law/charter_of_fundame
ntal_rights.html
5 https://www.dekamer.be/kvvcr/pdf_sections/publications/constitution/GrondwetUK.pdf


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
To build a systemically inclusive society, we must understand how systemic
exclusion occurs in the first place. Exclusion is the product of a variety of contributing factors, from
inherited obstacles such as the living conditions of the family and surroundings we are born in, to
access to education and support whilst in education, and upon completion of one’s education,
access to the labour market and a workplace, where we can bring our full self, and be supported to
achieve. It can be affected by external factors such as where we live, who we encounter, the services
we must interact with, and the biases of those who provide these services, and these factors
accumulate over time.
Exclusion and discrimination are experienced differently and individuals may face discrimination on
not just one, but multiple aspects of themselves. Building a systemically inclusive society therefore
requires applying both a multi-dimensional as well as an intersectional lens that accounts for the
existence of contributing factors that lead to exclusion, but also to the diversity of lived
experiences that may mean that for some individuals some factors are more affecting than others.
Public policies aiming to build a systemically inclusive society will only succeed with the
appreciation of this reality and the implementation of solutions that are multi-layered.
Volt Belgium champions tackling social inequity via an intersectional approach. We are convinced
that intersectionality is an essential lens that must be applied in all policies aiming to ensure no one
is left behind. Volt Belgium supports an effective mainstreaming of systemic inclusion, seeking for
the development and adoption of comprehensive National and Regional Action Plans for Systemic
Inclusion, developed in partnership with the concerned communities. These Action Plans should
have measurable outcomes and targets, data should be collected to monitor effective progress by
public and private actors, and measures of redress and accountability are necessary to ensure
appropriate financial means are made available to carry these plans out.
The National and Regional Action Plans for Systemic Inclusion should involve all relevant ministries
address the key determinants of socio-economic inequalities, including ensuring equitable access
to:
-
Housing and a healthy living environment,
-
Good and services,
-
Education,
-
Labour market and an inclusive workplace
-
Leisure, cultural, and sporting services
-
Transportation & mobility services
-
Public and social services
-
Social and financial capital
-
Effective protection against discrimination and enforcement of rights
-
Political representation and participation
As part of implementing the action plan, an observatory for equality data collection, covering both
public and private actors’ equality data collection, should be established to collect comprehensive
data on the prevalence of exclusion and to track progress against the indicators for success
stemming from the action plans.


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
Volt champions the strengthening of equality and civil society bodies, that serve
as intermediaries between public authorities, affected communities and individuals, by ensuring
both sufficient funding for these bodies to carry out their work, but also by adopting legislative
reforms that facilitate the ability of these actors to act on behalf of victims of discrimination in
front of the courts.
As demonstrated by the Ukraine War, the adoption of a humane migration policy and facilitated
access to the labour market can be highly effective and reduce burden on social services. Our
economy benefits when we facilitate excluded individuals accessing the labour market legally. Volt
champions the creation of a humane migration policy that enables new entrants to contribute fully
to the economy and consequently the financing of the expanded goods and services base required
by increasing the capacity of public services to process, and determine eligibility of candidate
refugees, repatriate those who have no legal standing, whilst creating corridors for regularisation
of individuals who have integrated into society.
Main Proposal 3 No one left behind
Volt is committed to championing policies in government that ensure that no one is left behind. Far
too long, the economic cost of exclusion has been ignored or underestimated. At a time when
Belgium faces numerous crises and challenges, many of the solutions that must be deployed require
all Belgians to reach their full potential. As a country committed to the EU values, we will ensure
that comprehensive federal, regional and provincial plans exist to tackle discriminations where they
happen, but also take into account the historic, structural, and systemic causes of these
discriminations. To tackle them, we champion a mainstream approach, underpinned by a
comprehensive evidence base stemming from both public and private sources, and measurable
targets that ensure real progress is taking place to reduce the number of people facing exclusion
and discrimination. This is essential not just for victims, but also for society as a whole which
ultimately suffers from the costs of exclusion.


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
Electoral Priority 8: Housing and City Planning
Across Europe, the rise of housing prices deprives younger generations of a life in dignity. More
generally, a poorly designed city may potentially have a large impact on our health and wellbeing,
with car-focused city planning being a key factor in this burden. Without clear and affirmative
action, unhealthy cities will continue to make Europeans sick and create a structural and
unnecessary burden on hospitals, the health sector in general, and our economy.
The cost of buying a house has seen a 45% increase between 2010 and 2022 in the EU [1]. This is
especially challenging for young people who often do not possess significant capital, and struggle
to get a loan.
Home ownership is sharply decreasing for young people in Europe (and more houses and wealth are
accumulated in the hands of fewer, richer and often older people). For example, 62,5% Southern
Europeans born between 1965 and 1979 owned a house at age 30, and this percentage has dropped
to 37,5% for people born in 1980 or after [2].
City planning: Urban and Transport planning considerably influences human health and wellbeing.
Around 20% of premature mortality in cities (where 70% of the population is projected to live by
2050) could be avoided if we have better urban and transportation planning in cities, with reducing
the car-dependency (by investing in sustainable mobility: active and public transport; reducing space
for roads and parkings) of cities and increasing green spaces, and recreation being an essential part
of the urban transition towards healthier cities [3] [4].
Most young Europeans under 30 would like to buy a home [5]. After the Covid pandemic, health is
still at the top of people’s main concerns and priorities. Unhealthy cities are a hidden burden of
disease, hospitalisations and deaths. In particular, unhealthy elements in cities, like cars, wood
smoke, or industry emissions, are just as toxic to our wellbeing and to the planet's sustainability as
better-known harms, such as asbestos or PFAS contamination.
Our towns and cities are more than just the built environment. They shape our daily life, our health,
and our happiness. It’s where we move, where we meet our friends, where we work and where we
spend our free time. Belgium has some of the most beautiful cities and towns in Europe, but there
are many things that we think can - and should - be done better. Here’s Volt’s vision for the city of
the future.


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
Main Proposal 1: Affordable and Inclusive Housing and city planning
(1) Affordable housing
The acquisition of a home is often seen as an important step in our lives as individuals and crucial
for those wishing to start a family. Not only does the lack of having a home hurt our position and
chances within society, it highly affects our health as well. This is why Volt believes in the right to a
home, which aims to keep the housing market more affordable while providing financial aid to
those wishing to purchase their very first home. We will make concrete proposals for this looking to
European Best Practices: we can learn from some projects that are already in place in other
countries to make buying and renting a home or apartment more affordable, especially for younger
people.
Furthermore will the right to a home include further investments into qualitative social
housing, shelters and temporary sleeping spaces.
(2) Inclusive city
Volt envisions a built environment in which every person can thrive, independently of their
background, abilities or gender. Today, many barriers to inclusion remain in our public spaces,
whether those are the steps which force a disabled person to take a detour, the lack of public
lighting making vulnerable people avoid places at night, or the unavailability of information in
languages other than the local one. Volt wants to achieve inclusive public spaces by involving
associations and representatives of minorities throughout the design of large urban projects, and
develop guidelines that can easily be applied by local authorities in their development projects to
check for and remedy any potential barriers to inclusion.
Main Proposal 2: Healthy and Sustainable Housing and city planning
(1) Cool cities: reduce urban heat islands
Summers are getting hotter, and often cities experience much higher temperatures than nearby
rural areas. This is not only uncomfortable, but can also pose a health risk for vulnerable people.
Volt proposes that, instead of cooling down the inside of our cars, trains and houses using air
conditioning, we start cooling down the entire city, in a natural way. We need to identify the hottest
parts of our cities via heat maps and, based on this, adapt the urban area around them. This might
mean the planting of trees and the greening of facades, but could also include infrastructure like
fountains, sun sails and pergolas. In addition, allocating less space to roads, parkings and cars and


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
more space to green areas and citizen-centered spaces like meeting places and
plains is part of this. To find the best mix for the local context, Volt advocates for a co-creative
approach in which residents and businesses, together with city planners and experts, plan, design
and create their future living space. Furthermore, new constructions and renovations should be tax
incentivized to include green facades and roofs as well as other architectural elements that allow
for the cooling of public spaces.
(2) Sustainable housing
Our built environment is amongst the main producers of CO2 emissions. Modern buildings reduce
energy consumption via insolation and more efficient appliances. While we want to promote the
building of energy efficient houses, they should not replace existing buildings. For the emissions of
new constructions to be balanced out by reduced energy consumption, they need to be used for ten
or twenty years, by which time new renovations (and emissions) take place. Volt therefore
promotes the reuse and upgrading of existing buildings over demolition and reconstruction. We
propose tax credits for the energetic renovation and reuse of unrenovated or abandoned buildings.
(3) Healthy city
As the world's population continues to grow and urbanize, it is increasingly important that we
prioritize the health and well-being of our cities and their inhabitants. Studies have shown that
around 20% of premature mortality in cities like Barcelona, and similar percentages are expected in
Belgian cities like Brussels and Antwerp, can be attributed to environmental factors such as air
pollution, lack of green spaces, and lack of physical activity. A huge amount of city space is allocated
to cars, both in terms of parking lots, street parking, and cars on the roads. In contrast, public
transport is much more space-efficient and can help reduce the negative health impacts associated
with car-oriented urban design.
The design and functioning of cities can have a profound impact on the health and quality of life of
those who live in them. With these factors contributing to negative health outcomes, it is vital that
we take a holistic approach to urban design that places health at the center. To reach this goal,
specific policies and measures should be implemented, such as promoting active transportation
options like cycling and walking, increasing green spaces and parks, implementing regulations to
reduce air pollution, and incorporating health impact assessments into urban planning decisions.
The advantages of these policy measures include improved health and well-being, increased safety


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
for cyclists, and a more livable, sustainable community for all. By creating
health-promoting cities, we can improve the lives of millions and create more sustainable, livable
communities for generations to come.
Four very specific measures here are (1) expansion of low-emission zones to all cities (which can be
similar to the current Brussels model) (2) the introduction of low emissions zones for wood stoves in
addition to cars as besides traffic, which is in general the most dominant source of air pollution
exposure, wood stoves also create unacceptable high particulate matter exposure in residential
areas (3) the obligation to implement health impact assessment in urban and spatial planning
assessments like MER and (4) a fair allocation of space in cities, with a maximum % of space that
may be allocated for cars (roads and parkings) and minimum percentages for green areas,
recreational areas, pedestrians, cyclists and public transportation.
(4) Clean city
Clean urban spaces increase appeal and use of amenities such as parks, playgrounds and transport.
At the moment, two issues influence the cleanliness of our cities: trash collection and littering.
Trash bags lying in the street the day before pickup are not only an eyesore, but also create
problems with animals and diseases. The same goes for the absence of sufficient numbers of public
trash bins, which incites littering and leads to the need to frequently clean our public spaces. Volt
proposes to combat this at the source: Install central underground trash collection points in every
other road, and increase the number of modern trash bins in our public spaces. Furthermore, we
propose an obligation for new and renovated houses to include central trash collection rooms as it
is already standard in many other european countries.


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
Electoral Priority 9.A. : Reform Brussels
Currently, Brussels is multi-layered and inefficient. There is the Brussels-Capital Region, with the
competencies of regions, with a parliament and a government (minister-president). The provincial
competencies are shared by the Hoge ambtenaar van de Brusselse Agglomeratie/Haut fonctionnaire
de l'Agglomération and the minister-president of the Region. Within this region, there are 19
municipalities, each with their own mayor, city council, and priorities. Those priorities are often not
aligned across the municipalities, while the reality shows that they are entangled. The borders
between the municipalities have faded away and we are living in a reality of 1 metropolitan area.
Our proposal
We want to reform Brussels into 1 capital city with 19 districts.
For our proposal we are looking at the model of other European capital cities, such as Berlin or
Prague. We believe that the current Brussels-Capital Region should become the City of Brussels, a
city with regional, provincial and municipality competences in one, where the mayor acts also as
regional minister-president, and provincial governor. The current 19 municipalities would become
districts within the city, for this we could use the Antwerp model.
Volt wants to make the governance of Brussels more efficient, by turning the 19 municipalities into
districts of 1 city, with municipal, provincial and regional competences
Electoral Priority 9.B: Strategic Expansion of EU
Competences
Volt believes that a lot of issues are the same all over Europe (or even beyond) and need a European
response. Therefore it would make sense to move competences from a national and regional, or
even a local, level to the EU.
1.
Health care
The Corona pandemic has shown that the divided national or regional representatives were
not able to answer a global pandemic. Each country or region had their own measures, with
each a different impact on the people living there. Borders were closed, families torn apart,


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
and the impact on the health care system was different everywhere.
Each country was fighting for their own delivery of masks or other medical material,
competing with other member states, instead of collaborating to get more done. The latter
was shown with the vaccines, here the EU stepped in and negotiated with the
pharmaceutical companies as a big economical and political power, with positive results.
2.
Energy
The war in Ukraine, with the resulting reduction of Russian energy import, again created a
competition between member states. Member states would go and negotiate with other
fossil fuel exporting countries on their own, while the energy network is interconnected.
CO2 emissions from a country’s coal plant doesn’t stop at the border, especially if this plant
is built at the border. Not every country has access to a sea, limiting the options for wind
energy.
3.
Climate
Climate change doesn’t stop at the border. It impacts the whole continent with floods in the
Belgian-German border region, forest fires over the whole south, melting glaciers in the
Alps.
4.
Asylum and migration
Volt wants a human refugee policy and a smart labour migration policy for the EU.
Collaboration and solidarity are a prerequisite to prevent future migration crises in Europe.
We will show our European values by receiving refugees and asylum seekers in a human way
and provide them a future. No adult nor child can be stuck in dangerous and inhumane
places like camps on Moria or Lesbos. Volt also wants to give labour migrants a better future
by providing them with clarity about the possibilities. That way we will improve the situation
of the labour migrants, ourselves and their countries of origin.
5.
Agriculture
Currently, farmers in different countries have different rules to follow, but their products
can be exported all over the EU without issues. This creates a situation of unfair competition.
Volt is a European party, with a focus on the EU. Therefore, we want to move more competences to
the European level, where it makes sense.


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
Electoral Priority 10: Citizen Participation
More and more citizens are turning away from society and policy. The number of people with an
anti-government
attitude
is
increasing.
Citizens
feel
badly
represented by their elected
representatives and find this problem important, as studies show. Moreover, an important source
of frustration is that citizens have no impact on policy between two elections. This dissatisfaction is
as great at the regional as at the federal level.
Research shows that this makes people long for a strong leader.12
In response, Volt wants to
strengthen democracy with stronger citizenship. For a revival of democracy with strong elements of
citizenship and citizen participation, we want to introduce the following proposals at the levels of
the regional government:
Main proposal 1: plebiscite (referenda)
We want to implement the decree on plebiscite in the constitution and want to implement
‘citizen reports’ based on the US Oregon Model.
The current constitution provides for non-binding referendums at regional level. However, there is
no implementing decree in Flanders yet, unlike the Brussels Region.
Volt wants citizens to be well and objectively informed before a plebiscite. Volt wants to provide all voters
with a citizens' report before every plebiscite.
The 'citizen report' is based on the Oregon model that has been applied in the US since
2010 (CIR - Citizens Initiative Review).
It starts from a panel of 18-24 drawn citizens who are as representative as possible of the
population. The panel studies all pros and cons of the proposals during five days, with the
help of experts and agree mutually on facts and numbers.
This report is then presented to the public through the press. Voters also receive this
report along with their ballot paper for a plebiscite.
Main Proposal 2: Petition Right
Volt advocates extending the right to petition, which already exists federally, to the Flemish and
Walloon Region, as already exists in the Brussels Region. In this way, petitioners have the right to
speak in parliament.
12 https://www.rtbf.be/article/noir-jaune-blues-un-leader-fort-cest-une-societe-faible-11141484


Volt Belgium - Regional Electoral Program 2024 for the Brussels Parliament Election
Main Proposal 3: Improve the Municipal decree
(1) First of all,
One clear and detailed participation regulation is necessary. Currently, each
municipality draws up its own participation regulations. As a result, the conditions in one
municipality may differ or be stricter than in another municipality.Volt proposes to provide all
participation instruments unambiguously and in detail in the municipal decree.
Secondly (2), Citizen councils should be drawn in the participation regulations13 : The municipal
decree describes a number of participation instruments, such as plebiscites. However, the
instrument 'civic councils drawn by lot' is missing. Volt also wants this instrument to be included in
the municipal decree.
Further (3), More transparency in decision-making should be the case: There are many councils
who want their administrative documents to be viewed as little as possible, both by municipal
councilors and citizens. Volt is in favor of adopting the Walloon decree in the Flemish and Brussels
regions.14 The more extensive transparency obligations in the Walloon transparency decree15 must
therefore also be included in the Flemish decree on local government16 be included.
The text obliges municipalities and provinces to publish the draft deliberations and summary notes
on the agenda items of the public meeting of their council no later than five clear days before that
of the municipal council.17
The only personal data communicated are the names of the representatives, elected persons and
candidates for these positions. The personal data of other natural persons involved are anonymised.
The municipality can make documents public via this free tool:
deliberations.be
We notice that transparency is sometimes limited by, for example, making texts available online in
the form of photos, so that they are not used by search robots.indexed. Volt wants to prohibit such
forms of regulatory obstruction.
17 https://www.stradalex.com/fr/sl_news/document/sl_news_article20220719-6-fr
16 https://lokaalbestuur.vlaanderen.be/werking-bestuur/bekendmakingsplicht
15 https://wallex.wallonie.be/sites/wallex/contents/acts/69/69946/1.html - art 3
14 https://transparencia.be/
13 https://lokaalbestuur.vlaanderen.be/werking-bestuur/burgerparticipatie


