Campaign Narrative - 2024 European Election
Future: Made in Europe
Today, Europeans are facing multiple existential crises on a scale not seen in
decades.
Russian missiles have shattered not only homes and hospitals in Ukraine, but also
the peace and security that most of us have long taken for granted.
Rivers in one part of Europe are running dry, just as towns and villages in another
part are being devastated by torrential flooding.
Many of us are struggling to afford basic goods, and manufacturing industries
are leaving because of high energy prices.
The poor sleep on the streets while huge corporations dodge paying their fair
share of taxes.
Boats filled with people fleeing war and oppression are capsizing before our
shores.
Yet, amid these unprecedented crises, politicians carry on as usual. National
governments make half-hearted efforts to solve these problems, and when they
do act, they often damage the interests of fellow Europeans.
But that’s exactly the problem. Wars and refugees, social injustice and climate
change aren’t contained by borders. That makes it impossible for national
governments to overcome them alone. The result is division, extremism, and
paralysis.
But
there
is another way. We can overcome these
challenges if we tackle them together, as Europeans, in a
united, federal and truly democratic Europe.
Together, we can build a Europe that works for all of us,
whoever we are, wherever we live, and whatever we do.
A Europe that can defend itself and that safeguards peace
in the world.
A Europe that transitions decisively towards renewable
energy and ensures that basic necessities are affordable
for everyone.
Page 1


A Europe that provides a refuge to those seeking safety and that
attracts talented people to help us achieve what we cannot achieve by ourselves.
A Europe with an economy that delivers prosperity while protecting our planet.
And a Europe that is not torn apart by divisive and inhumane nationalist and
populist politics.
But rather one that is marked by dignity, solidarity, fairness and transparency, in
which citizens are empowered to make the changes they seek.
To build this Europe, we founded Volt.
As the first truly pan-European party,
we bring together the knowledge and
perspectives of thousands of people
from
Ireland
to
Romania,
and
from
Finland
to
Malta,
to
develop
our
evidence-based policies. And we fight for
these
same
policies
everywhere
in
Europe.
Millions
of Europeans have already
entrusted us with their votes at the
municipal, national and European levels.
More than 125 Volters already represent
citizens in countries including Bulgaria,
Germany, Greece, Italy, the Netherlands
and Portugal.
Our next goal is to win 23 seats in the European Parliament. This will make us an
independent political force for all Europeans, and it will demonstrate that value-driven,
pan-European democracy is the future.
Do you agree that we need to do politics differently? Be part of the change for a future
made in Europe!
Page 2


