 
 
Code of Conduct  
This document encompasses the values of Volt Sverige in detail. 
The Community Guidelines, as stated in the Annex, provide for a 
summarized version of the Code of Conduct and forms part of 
this Code.  
Article 1 - Scope of application  
All members and volunteers of Volt Sverige are obligated to abide 
by the following articles of this Code of Conduct (hereinafter 
referred to as the “Code”) and the Integrity Syllabus 2024 of Volt 
Europa. In case of conflicting articles, the articles of the Integrity 
Syllabus 2024 of Volt Europa prevails.  
In no circumstance may a person officially join Volt Sverige without 
the full and conscious acceptance of the obligation to abide by the 
present articles.  
Article 2 - Purpose  
1. The Code aims to ensure a safe, fair and effective working 
environment for all members and volunteers.  
2. The Code aims to promote credible and inclusive behavioural 
practices on the part of members and volunteers of Volt 
Sverige.  
3. The Code explicitly defines the general conduct requirements 
that any person involved in Volt Sverige shall meet, so as to 
prevent behaviours that are in conflict with values, rules and 
principles of the association.  
4. The Code supplements the Statutes, the Regulations and any 
other obligatory provision made by the bodies of Volt 
Sverige, in order to provide behavioural guidelines that shall 
ensure decision making and work ethics on all levels to be 
consistent with values, rules and principles of the association.  
 
 
 
1 


 
Article 3 - Relations with the 
association  
1. Members and volunteers shall behave in all areas with fairness, 
sincerity and good faith, and be committed to always protect and 
not damage the reputation, material assets and intellectual 
property of the association.  
2. Members and volunteers shall not, under any circumstances, 
disclose confidential information, in written or oral form, 
without appropriate authority  
3. Members must not take roles or part in decisions or 
resolutions in which they find themselves in a position of 
conflict of interest.  
4. Members and volunteers must indicate relevant offices they 
hold and memberships in other organizations with social and 
political purposes.  
Article 4 - Principles and values  
1. Volt Sverige endorses non-discriminatory and inclusive 
behavior, based on mutual respect, human dignity, equal 
opportunities, justice and rule of law, freedom and solidarity.  
2. To ensure that all members and volunteers of Volt Sverige 
follow the principals and values outlined above, the following 
behavioural guidelines regarding conduct shall apply to all of the 
Volt Sverige’s internal and external processes, campaigns, projects 
and other activities:  
a. Non-discriminatory and inclusive behaviour - all members 
and volunteers shall commit themselves to support and 
promote the inviolable and inalienable rights of the 
person, freedom, solidarity and equality for all humans, 
regardless of their gender, religious beliefs, race, sexual 
orientation, level of education, financial background, and 
other aspects of life.  
b. Mutual respect and human dignity - all members and 
volunteers shall commit themselves to treat each other 
with respect and promote internal constructive dialogue in 
case of misunderstandings. Freedom of speech and other 
freedoms shall not be abused to violate the dignity of other 
people.  
c. No misinformation and deceit - all members and 
volunteers shall commit themselves to avoid 
 
2 


 
misinforming or deceiving members and volunteers of 
Volt Sverige, Volt Europa and any other stakeholder.  
d. No abuse of power - Members and volunteers undertake 
not to abuse the power and influence associated with the 
position held in order to obtain unfair advantage at the 
expense of others.  
Article 5 - Enforcement of the Code 1. 
1. In case the board has been informed about noticeable 
misconduct of these articles, the misconduct may be subject to 
sanctioning provided for by the Statutes.  
2. Should the board discover a serious and repetitive violation of 
the following articles and other internal regulations regarding 
conduct, the violator shall be subject to appropriate and fair 
sanctioning as prescribed by the relevant provisions in the Statutes 
and any other relevant documentations.  
Article 6 - Final provisions  
This Code, or a summarized version of it, shall be read through 
carefully by the potential members and volunteers, who shall, upon 
decision to join Volt Sverige, fully accept all of the present Articles. As 
such, this Code shall apply to all existing members and volunteers 
from the commencement of their membership onwards, and its full 
acceptance is a prerequisite for joining Volt Sverige.  
Article 7 - Entry into force  
This document was proposed by the board and adopted by the 
members at the General Assembly of Volt Sverige on MONTH DAY, 
YEAR and enters into force on MONTH DAY+1, YEAR.  
 
 
 
3 


 
Annex: Community Guidelines  
Members of Volt Sverige are expected to act with honesty, integrity, 
and good faith. It is important to remember that each individual has 
their own moral compass. Every member should be mindful of their 
actions, words, and writing or in other means in which it expresses 
itself. For the full version we ask you to check out the Code of 
Conduct of Volt Sverige. ​
Volt Sverige holds the following community guidelines:  
1. Non-discriminatory and inclusive behaviour - all members and 
volunteers shall commit themselves to support and promote, in 
all aspects of their personal and professional life, the inviolable 
and inalienable rights of the person, freedom, solidarity and 
equality for all humans, regardless of their gender, religious 
beliefs, race, sexual orientation, level of education, financial 
background, and other aspects of life.  
2. Mutual respect and human dignity - all members and 
volunteers shall commit themselves to treat each other with 
respect and promote internal constructive dialogue in case of 
misunderstandings. Freedom of speech and other freedoms 
shall not be abused to violate the dignity of other people.  
3. No misinformation and deceit - all members and volunteers 
shall commit themselves to not purposefully misinform or 
deceive members and volunteers of Volt Sverige, Volt Europa 
and any other stakeholder.  
4. No abuse of power - Members and volunteers undertake not to 
abuse the power and influence associated with the position 
held in order to obtain an undue personal advantage or unfair 
advantage at the expense of others.  
5. No disclosure of confidential information - Members and 
volunteers shall not, under any circumstances, disclose internal 
documents or any other confidential information, in written or 
oral form, with any legal or natural person who is not the 
official member or volunteer of the association.  
6. Protect Volt’s reputation - Members and volunteers shall 
behave in all areas with fairness, sincerity and good faith, and 
be committed to always protect and not damage the 
reputation, material assets and intellectual property of the 
association.  
7. No conflict of interest - Members and volunteers shall not be 
involved in activities or positions in case it will be considered a 
conflict of interest.  
 
4 
