Volt Cyprus | Βολτ Κύπρος | Volt Kıbrıs
Proposed Founding Declaration /v6
Founding Declaration
1. We are active citizens with the will to form a progressive political space that
significantly influences the course of our country.
2. We are Cypriots, and we are Europeans. We want to shape common
positions for all countries and the governance system in the European
Union.
3. We love Europe; it is our home, but this does not mean that there is no room
for improvement.
4. We envision a strong and just Europe for all, regardless of their religion,
origin, social and economic status, sexual orientation, or gender identity.
5. We feel that the fight against xenophobia, discrimination, and unequal
development is our obligation.
6. We know that many of today's problems we face, perhaps the most
significant, have no borders, and cannot be approached comprehensively at
the national level.
7. Climate change, global immigration, racism, and the visible threat to global
peace, require the cooperation of all European citizens.
8. The pan-European platform of Volt Europa ensures that these challenges
will be addressed with a unified program and design, resulting from
collectivity, mutual understanding, and collaboration.
9. Volt Cyprus (Volt Kibris – Βολτ Κύπρος), an equal and active member of Volt
Europa, is here to express the social movement and political trend for
significant change!
10.With our actions and proposals, we aim to stand together with all Cypriots
who envision a peaceful and hopeful future:
A united Cyprus in a united Europe.
11.In our country, we experience the pathologies of a political system
established as a regime of exemption status, where factional and client
state mentalities were developed.
12.The Cypriot governance system has never been oriented towards peace,
inclusion, and good governance.
Volt Cyprus I Page 1


Volt Cyprus | Βολτ Κύπρος | Volt Kıbrıs
Proposed Founding Declaration /v6
13.Parties have shown over time that they prioritize their narrow factional
interests, over the interests of the whole of Cyprus.
14.The political arena has turned into a party-power struggle in order to share
the privileges of power.
15.Traditional political forces have not been able to cooperate on a sincere and
permanent basis to allow us to enjoy what we deserve:
A modern and robust democracy that belongs to all Cypriots.
16.Our schools are unable to prepare young citizens for the real needs of the
modern era.
17.Nationalism, populism, corruption, and tolerance dominate the public
sphere.
18.As a result, citizens undervalue democratic processes, the prospect of
resolving the Cyprus problem, and the importance of the European Union.
19.There are forces and powerful interests in both communities that benefit
from division and corruption, invest in the status quo, and perpetuate the
"law of necessity."
20.It's time to tell them, "enough!" Cyprus deserves better, and we have a
different plan for our country.
21.Volt aspires to connect the federal perspective of Europe with the federal
perspective for our country.
22.We believe that federalism can provide answers to the major challenges
facing both Cyprus and the European Union.
23.Together and united, we can determine the fate of our island and our
European family.
24.Europe can offer Cyprus ideas, expertise, and comprehensive support based
on its own historical processes of unification.
25.Our country, in turn, has the opportunity and the potential to provide
Europe with an example of multicultural coexistence and cooperation,
despite the complex situation and difficulties faced on the island.
26.Progressive, pragmatic, European!
27.We aspire to become the voice of Europeanism, moderation, modernization,
and reunification of our country.
Volt Cyprus I Page 2


Volt Cyprus | Βολτ Κύπρος | Volt Kıbrıs
Proposed Founding Declaration /v6
28.We are ready to propose solutions that are effective and are based on
pan-European experience, innovation, and social responsibility.
29.We are ready to propose solutions that are effective and based on
pan-European experience, innovation, and social responsibility.
30.We are creating a party built from the ground up, structured on solid
statutory principles and operating rules.
31.An open, democratic party with complete transparency, with youth and
women at the forefront!
32.A party that will inspire society, give meaning to the idea of participation,
and restore value to the democratic organization of citizens.
33.We want citizens to trust politics again and actively participate in shaping
the conditions that affect them directly, both in the short term and long
term.
34.By mobilizing and activating the progressive forces of society, we can
transform Cyprus into a modern and significant country for Europe, our
region, and the world.
35.We want to dare significant reforms!
36.We need a secular, "smart," and flexible state that assists rather than
hinders the well-being and happiness of citizens.
37.The cost of housing and everyday life is unbearable for most of our fellow
citizens. We can do much more for our youth and families!
38.We will insist on reforms that are sacrificed on the altar of electoral
clientelism and conservatism and propose radical solutions to the problems
that are continuously burdened on the shoulders of the next generation.
39.We envision a state that protects the vulnerable, defends the righteous
interests of the labor force, and provides equal opportunities for all.
40.A state that operates as a fair regulator of the internal market and as a
guardian
of
an
economy
open
to
initiative,
entrepreneurship,
and
innovation.
41.For Volt, prosperity is inconceivable when development comes at the
expense of the ecosystem.
Volt Cyprus I Page 3


Volt Cyprus | Βολτ Κύπρος | Volt Kıbrıs
Proposed Founding Declaration /v6
42.At our core are the principles of ecologically sustainable growth, energy
transition,
biodiversity
protection,
and
environmentally
sustainable
management.
43.Deep changes are needed for all of these, without the fear of political cost.
44.We believe that such a party, which dares the required ruptures, is absent
from the political spectrum of our island.
45.It's time to create it together, with the citizens, for the citizens.
46.To create a party that will focus on the common future of the people of
Cyprus and Europe. A party that knows how to listen and wants to be heard.
We draw momentum from the new generation.
47.We cannot afford to passively wait for others to take care of our own
dreams.
48.We take politics into our own hands.
49.Join us in this effort to create Volt.
50.Our common European future.
A future made in Europe.
Volt Cyprus I Page 4
