 
 
Volt Europa - Data Protection 
Report 2021 
 
Data Protection Officers  
Since summer 2020, two dedicated members are the DPOs of Volt Europa. They can 
be contacted at dpo@volteuropa.org.  
 
Data Governance  
One of the DPOs continues her participation in the “Governance Commission”. 
 
Accountability  
The “Data Protection Library”, placed on Google Drive, was updated. It is a collection 
of relevant data protection documents.  
 
Rights of the data subject  
Many requests about rights of data subjects reached the DPOs.  
We coordinated the requested actions (information, correction or deletion) in close 
cooperation with the Secretary General and the TechTeam.  
 
Personal data breach  
At the end of December 2021, the General Secretary and the DPO received 
notification  of a data breach. A Dutch journalist announced on Twitter that he had 
received member data of Volt members from at least the Netherlands and Belgium. 
The GS and Dutch  DPO took the steps that needed to be taken in this situation and 
the EUR DPOs were always kept informed. It seemed that a Volt member with access 
to this personal data transferred it to the journalist. To prevent such data breaches in 
the future, GS,  TechLeads and DPO are in contact. The necessary measures will be 
taken in 2022.  
 
Data Processing Agreements  
Some Data Processing Agreements and “Joint Controllership Agreements” are in  
process.  
 
Technical and organisational measures [TOM]   
The DPOs continued the documentation of technical and organisational measures. 
They  adhered to the relevant processes, and answered corresponding questions of 
Page 1 - Volt Data Protection Report 2021 


 
 
functional  teams and national chapters.  
 
Records of processing activities  
There is no obligation to keep records of processing activities for us. Nevertheless it 
is  favourable to have an overview of this. The DPOs updated this register.  
 
Risk assessment  
If the data processing “is likely to result in a high risk for the rights and freedoms of  
natural persons” [Art. 35 (1) GDPR] a Data Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA) is  
required.   
The DPOs’ analysis of requests for a risk assessment led them to conclude that no 
DPIA  was needed, but that it was important to consider it in the first place.  
 
National chapters  
If requested, the DPOs advised national chapters on questions related to data  
protection.  
Volt España asked them to take on the role of national DPO until a qualified member  
was found. DPO Robert Seifert agreed to take on this task for a limited time. 
 
Perspective  
The growth of the organisation brings new data protection challenges. To stay aware 
of data protection considerations in Volt Europa  
requires continuous checks, advice and proposals for the whole organisation. 
 
December 2021  
 
By the Data Protection Officers 
Page 2 - Volt Data Protection Report 2021 


