Data Protection Report 2022 
 
 
 
Data Protection Report 2022 
 
Data Protection Officers (DPO) 
Since summer 2020, two dedicated members have been the DPOs of Volt Europa. 
They can be contacted at dpo@volteuropa.org. 
One of the DPOs will discontinue his role at the end of the year for personal reasons. 
Data governance 
One of the DPOsr continued her participation in the “Governance Commission” in 2022, 
until the EUR Board decided to dissolve this commission. 
Accountability 
An intense discussion has been going on about handling membership data after leaving 
the organisation. The DPOs took part in this project. The DPOs have been asked for advice 
on handling candidate data during and after elections. As requested, the DPOs advised 
national chapters on questions related to data protection. 
Data subject rights 
As in previous years, many requests about data subject rights reached the DPOs. 
The DPOs coordinated the requested actions (information, correction or deletion) 
in close cooperation with the responsible General Secretary and the European Tech Team. 
Data analytics 
How far do “legitimate interests” under the GDPR stretch to allow keeping personal data? 
The balancing act of protection of personal data and data analytics requirements in 
membership administration and evaluation of voting results was discussed with the DPOs 
taking part. 
Software used by Volt 
The DPOs have been involved in the implementation of new software systems for an 
assessment of data protection compliance. 
 
Volt Europa  I  Page 1 
 


Data Protection Report 2022 
 
 
 
Outlook 
The Data Protection Library on Google Drive is a collection of relevant data protection 
documents, which is kept updated. 
The DPOs hope that the vacancy of a Co-DPO will be filled soon to fulfil all important 
tasks. 
Staying aware of data protection considerations in Volt Europa requires continuous 
checks, advice and proposals for the whole organisation. 
 
December 2022 
DPO team  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Volt Europa  I  Page 2 
 


