

 
2 
A Europe for everyone 
As more and more conflicts erupt around the world, we’re reminded of how fortunate most of us are to have 
enjoyed decades of peace and security. We owe this historically unique period of peace to the process of 
European integration. A process which has brought not only stability, but also unprecedented wealth to 
the vast majority of Europeans. 
But as successful as the European project has been, it’s still not living up to its potential. People on our 
continent are facing real crises: from wars on our borders, the climate catastrophe and rampant poverty, to 
the inhumane treatment of people seeking refuge, and economic stagnation. And these problems are not 
being solved. 
National governments make only half-hearted efforts to address them. And when they do act, they often 
undermine the interests of their fellow Europeans. 
And that’s exactly what’s wrong. These are not the kinds of crises that can be contained by borders. And that 
makes it impossible for national governments to overcome them alone. The result is division, extremism, 
and paralysis. 
However, there is another way. We can overcome these challenges if we tackle them together, as 
Europeans, in a united, federal and truly democratic Europe.  
Together, we can build a Europe that lives up to its potential, and that works for all of us, whoever we are, 
wherever we live, and whatever we do. 
A Europe that can defend itself and safeguard peace in the world.  
A Europe that transitions decisively towards renewable energy and ensures that basic necessities are 
affordable for everyone. 
A Europe that provides a refuge to those seeking safety and that attracts talented people to help us 
achieve what we cannot achieve by ourselves. 
A Europe with an economy that delivers prosperity while protecting our planet. 
And a Europe that is not torn apart by divisive and inhumane nationalist and populist politics.  
But rather one that is marked by dignity, solidarity, fairness and transparency, in which citizens are 
empowered to make the changes they seek. 
To build this Europe, we founded Volt. 
As the first truly pan-European party, we do politics differently. We bring together the knowledge and 
perspectives of thousands of people - from Ireland to Romania, from Finland to Malta - to develop 
evidence-based policies. And we fight for these same policies everywhere in Europe.  
Millions of Europeans have already entrusted us with their votes at the municipal, national and European 
levels. More than 125 Volters already represent citizens in countries including Bulgaria, Germany, Greece, 
Italy, the Netherlands and Portugal. 
Our next goal is to win 23 seats in the European Parliament. This will make us an independent political force 
for all Europeans, and it will demonstrate that value-driven, pan-European democracy is the future. 
 
 
 
Do you agree that we need to do politics differently?  
Do you believe in a future made in Europe? If so, scan the QR code and 
become part of the change. 


 
3 
 
A better EU 
 
 
 
 
Europe's unification brought unprecedented peace and prosperity 
after two devastating World Wars. It has shown how working together, 
across borders, and with common humanity can stave off division and 
destruction. But the EU as it stands is far from perfect. At a time when 
populism and disaffection are on the rise, it’s vital that we start 
shaping our EU so that it works for all of us.  
 
 
 
 


 
4 
To shape our EU for the better, we want to: 
 
 
Make the EU more democratic and give people a bigger say. 
 Establish a Federal Europe with European parties and a European 
government, headed by a European Prime Minister. 
 Turn the Council of the European Union into a European Senate, abolish the 
national veto power, and empower Parliament to propose laws. 
 Lower the voting age to 16 and allow citizens to propose laws via 
petitions. 
 
 
Increase transparency, and fight corruption and autocratic 
tendencies. 
 Establish a new European Constitutional Court that can revoke national 
laws on the basis of a new EU constitution.  
 Cut EU funds and voting rights from governments that undermine 
democracy, media freedom, fundamental rights or their justice system, and 
instead allow for direct funding of municipalities and cities. 
 Enforce European standards that protect journalists from being silenced 
and make lobbyists register all their meetings in one platform to hold 
politicians accountable. 
 
 
Safeguard the European economy through a new fiscal 
architecture. 
 
 Complete the Eurozone and Banking Union and enable a new European 
Finance Minister to propose the yearly budget. 
 Empower the EU to counter economic shocks with clear deficit rules, 
reform requirements, and stabilising investment tools. 
 Introduce a minimum corporate tax rate of 22% across Europe and ensure 
profits are taxed where they are made 
 


 
5 
 
 
Give Europe a powerful voice on the world stage and make it 
independent from others for its security. 
 Set up a European armed forces under the control of Parliament and 
jointly procure weapons. 
 Enable a true European Foreign Minister to represent a united and value-
based foreign policy and work toward global consensus on issues such as 
climate, AI and cybersecurity. 
 Establish a European Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) Review system to 
screen investments in critical and strategic infrastructure and introduce Joint 
Intelligence Services. 
 
 
Promote peace and human rights through aid, trade and 
enlargement. 
 Promote trade agreements that are based on sustainability and human 
rights to diversify Europe's trade dependencies. 
 Contribute over €100bn to official development assistance and coordinate 
aid funding through a European Development Agency. 
 Support Ukraine with weapons and funds until it regains its territorial 
integrity, and introduce a new and gradual path for candidate countries to 
join the EU that is fairer, more transparent and efficient. 
 
 
 
 


 
6 
An innovation-friendly and 
climate-neutral economy 
 
 
 
Europe's economy has provided us with a high standard of living for 
decades. But we know that success has come at a cost. Almost every 
day now we wake up to news of climate catastrophe – flooding in one 
part of Europe and fire in another. We know that if we want to survive 
and thrive, we need to change the way we run our economy. Yet, this 
moment of crisis is also an opportunity for positive change. We can 
harness the innovation, creativity and talent that Europe already has to 
build a sustainable, climate neutral economy that will see us through 
the 21st century. 
 


 
7 
To build an economy fit for 
the 21st century, we want to: 
 
 
Reach climate neutrality as quickly and fairly as possible. 
 Commit to a Climate Neutral Economy by 2040 and to a climate neutral 
energy sector by 2035. 
 End fossil fuel subsidies, introduce an EU-wide Carbon Tax, and use the 
revenues to help those most affected by the green transition. 
 Establish a Green Jobs Strategy for challenged regions by improving 
connectivity and infrastructure, supporting re-skilling, and working with 
companies and educational institutions in strategic industries. 
 
 
Update our power infrastructure and shift road and air traffic to 
rail. 
 Support the economy with a European Smart Energy Grid, by speeding up 
permits for renewables, supporting energy saving initiatives and allowing 
citizens to feed energy into the grid. 
 Promote the total phase-out of coal by 2030 and stop issuing new permits 
to drill for fossil fuels. 
 Establish an affordable, interconnected, high-speed rail service to 
substitute air transportation in Europe. 
 
 
Protect our planet by promoting sustainable practices. 
 
 Protect animal welfare by banning long-distance animal transport to non-
EU countries and individual caging in farming. 
 Phase out subsidies to environmentally harmful farming practices and 
allocate funds to regenerative agriculture. 
 Restore biodiversity by setting binding European and national targets, 
supporting nature restoration projects for land and water, and protecting 
indigenous and pollinating insects. 
 


 
8 
 
 
Make digitalisation work for everyone. 
 Set up a one-stop-shop for start-ups and SMEs to navigate bureaucracy, and 
introduce English as an additional official language across Europe. 
 Make all administration services interoperable across Europe, and enforce 
an open data and open source approach for all publicly procured software 
and data. 
 Roll out the EU Digital Identity Wallet featuring user control, decentralised 
data storage, and robust data protection. 
 
 
Make Europe a leader in innovation and competitiveness. 
 Foster EU research excellence by tripling the funding of Horizon to €300bn 
and simplifying access to funding for start-ups and smaller companies. 
 Require large investors to invest at least 5% of new funds into start-ups 
and have the European Investment Bank guarantee €100m in loans for start-
up infrastructure projects. 
 Europeanise state aid to invest in value chains of strategic relevance to 
safeguard the internal market and competition between Member States. 
 
 
Make it easy for people from all over the world to work and create 
value in Europe. 
 Enable remote workers to work across borders and give gig-economy and 
freelance workers the same protections as contract workers. 
 Ensure standardised qualifications and skills recognition across the EU, 
and enhance administrative capacity to enable workers' families to join 
them within three months. 
 Establish a European Migration Code to set up speedy legal pathways to 
attract international talent at all wage and skill levels. 
 
 


 
9 
 
A more just society 
 
 
 
With its abundant resources, Europe should be a place where people 
from all over the world can create a thriving future for themselves and 
their communities. Yet for many, barriers in the form of discrimination 
or poor access to services, as well as wealth inequality, mean that their 
participation in society is needlessly limited. By confronting and 
eliminating discrimination, defending people's rights, and ensuring 
that everyone can access the things they need, we can build a more 
equitable society where everyone can thrive, regardless of their 
background and life circumstances. 
 


 
10 
To build a fairer, more 
equitable society, we aim to: 
 
 
Deliver high-quality, forward-looking education for everyone. 
 Increase the budget for European exchanges to make ERASMUS+ more 
accessible and inclusive for school students, teachers and apprentices. 
 Guarantee by law the right to high-quality, free daycare and affordable 
lifelong education, and promote skills suitable to a green and digitalised 
economy. 
 Tackle mental health challenges for young people by funding mental 
health initiatives in schools and education on healthy use of social media. 
 
 
Fight discrimination so that everyone enjoys the same rights and 
opportunities. 
 Require all EU institutions take a gender perspective into account in their 
policymaking. 
 Enshrine in law the right to abortion, contraception and comprehensive 
sexual and reproductive rights education, the right to equal marriage and 
the right of legal gender recognition. 
 Create a European Disability Agency to ensure full implementation of the 
UN Convention of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD). 
 
 
Promote a good standard of living by providing vital public services 
and fostering social solidarity. 
 Establish a regionally cost-adjusted European Basic Income (EBI) that 
covers basic living expenses while incentivising well-paid work. 
 Enable the EU to directly finance social housing projects in the most 
affected cities. 
 Set up direct local-level funding to support communities to integrate 
newcomers according to their needs. 
 


 
11 
 
 
Make asylum fair and humane. 
 Create humanitarian corridors to provide safe passage to vulnerable 
people, preventing the massive loss of life in the Mediterranean and 
Atlantic. 
 Relocate asylum seekers from our borders quickly and fairly, on the basis 
of a combination of regional voluntary and national mandatory 
arrangements. 
 Legally require asylum procedures to be completed within three months, 
while providing asylum seekers with social, legal and psychological support. 
 
Safeguard people's rights in the digital world and make 
digitalisation serve all Europeans. 
 Establish a European streaming service, providing citizens with free access 
to all media produced with public money across the union. 
 Convert the Declaration on European Digital Rights and Principles for the 
Digital Decade into a binding legal instrument. 
 Tax revenue from digital technologies where it is generated, oppose 
legislation that threatens to net neutrality and take measures against 
unethical uses of AI. 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VOLT EUROPA A.I.S.B.L. 
Boulevard Bischoffsheim n° 39 boîte 4 
1000 Bruxelles 
BE 0730.949.438 
www.volteuropa.org 
info@volteuropa.org 
 
