Volt’s Energy
Transition and
Climate Change
Policy
A Comprehensive Green Transformation of
Europe


Table of Contents:
Introduction
2
Increase the Targets on Emission Reduction
4
Volt’s Carbon Pricing Concept
4
Pricing Greenhouse Emissions
5
Sector-Specific Regulation
6
Carbon tariffs to create a level competitive playing field and prevent carbon leakage
7
Energy Transition in the European Energy System
9
Electricity Market
9
Renewable Energy System
10
Nuclear Energy
12
Bioenergy
16
Transportation Revolution
17
Road and Mobility
17
European Rail Transportation
18
Revolutionising Aviation
18
Maritime Industry and Shipping
19
Sustainable Buildings
21
Sustainable Agriculture & Land Use, and Natural Carbon Capture
24
Carbon sinks / Carbon sequestering
27
Negative Emissions
27
Afforestation/Reforestation
27
Biochar
28
Bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS)
29
Direct Air Carbon Capture & Storage (DACCS)
30
Adaptation Strategies
32
Politics, Budget, and Governance of the Fair Transition
33
‘United in diversity’: the role of the EU and Member States
33
Green Governance
34
Funding and social transition
35
Climate Diplomacy
37
1


I. Introduction
The 2015 Paris Agreement was a diplomatic breakthrough in the fight against climate
change.1 Almost all countries committed to limiting global warming to 2°C, aiming for
1.5°C, through strict and continuously reported nationally determined contributions
(NDCs). Yet, despite good intentions, humankind remains far from solving the climate
crisis: all pledges, targets and NDCs combined would only limit global warming to 3.2°C
with only a 66% probability.2 With current policies, the European Union (EU) is not on a 2°C
or 1.5°C pathway either. All the while, science presents more and more evidence that the
window of opportunity to solve this existential challenge is narrowing.
Europe needs a massive green transformation involving technological, structural, and
behavioural
revolutions
to
live
in
a
well-balanced
world,
where
corporations,
governments, and citizens take a larger responsibility for future generations and the
future of our planet.
Volt envisions a transition with the primary objective of stopping anthropogenic global
warming as well as achieving a long-term sustainable and prosperous eco-civilization, hand
in hand with technological development. We aim to boost progressive policies and to take
the ecological revolution to the next level, from the local to the European and ultimately
to the global political stage. In addition, we will push for a transition that is as social and
fair as possible, encouraging citizen empowerment and targeting the biggest polluters.
Volt is committed to working towards climate neutrality in energy production and use
by 2035. The required changes will fundamentally alter society, our economies, and the
relationship of humanity to the environment. The current delay of action, however, does
not delay the impact of consequences. Volt recognises that a broad range of impactful
policies are required to ensure livable societies and a humane future worldwide. These
include policies to transform our behaviour and our economy, as well as policies intended
to speed up the energy transition and reduce the damage done to the environment. Volt
aims to fairly distribute the burden of these policies, based on the principle that the
responsibility to act should be proportional to the damage done and profit gained by all
parties alike, companies, institutions, and people across the world.
Climate change is the ultimate cross-border issue that requires collective and forceful
action. Volt is uniquely positioned to provide a European response to the unprecedented
2Carbon Action Tracker per 19 September 2019. Available at:
https://climateactiontracker.org/global/temperatures/
1 United Nations (2015). The Paris Agreement. Available at:
https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/the-paris-agreement/the-paris-agreement
2


challenge of halting climate change through climate mitigation and adaptation measures.
This policy begins by introducing the targets and pathways to decarbonise Europe in
Chapter II. This is followed by the carbon pricing policy, one of the main instruments to
achieve decarbonisation, in Chapter III. The policy introduces specific regulations aimed at
the European energy sector in Chapter IV. As the transition also requires a paradigm shift
in the mobility and shipping sectors, Chapter V details our proposals to revolutionise
transportation. Chapter VI specifies the proposed policies to decarbonize the housing and
building sector. These are followed in Chapter VII by specific policies aimed at
decarbonising
the agriculture sector while achieving negative emissions through
ecosystem restoration efforts. Additional strategies for negative emissions are described
in Chapter VIII. As noted before, adaptation is key to facing the damages already done to
the ecosystem and biosphere, and these are detailed in Chapter IX. The policy concludes in
Chapter X with specific governance aspects, including provisions to ensure a fair
transition.
3


II. Increase Targets on Emission Reduction
The European Union is already experiencing a climate and biodiversity emergency.
Meeting this challenge requires an unprecedented sense of urgency and ambitious,
comprehensive climate policies. To this end, Volt aims to ensure a sufficient supply of
cleaner energy and supports the creation of a strategy to achieve the decarbonization of
energy supply in the EU. This strategy should
➢Reduce net greenhouse gas emissions3 by 80% by 2030 compared to 2019, and
100%4 by 2040, so that the EU becomes carbon-neutral and contributes its fair
share to limiting global warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius by 2100, with a 66% chance
of success.5
➢Support
technological
innovation
as
well
as
structural
and
behavioural
transformation towards sustainable ways of living.
➢Develop and start implementing a long-term carbon negativity strategy to
achieve the 2040 carbon neutrality milestone, thus creating a buffer in case other
economies do not contribute their fair share in reversing damaging global warming
in the long run. Carbon sinks/carbon sequestering should be its main focus,
including technical solutions (e.g., carbon capture & sequestration) and natural
carbon sinks (e.g., ecosystem restoration and sustainable agriculture).
Volt’s Carbon Pricing Concept
Climate change is the result of a massive market failure: Social and ecological costs to
third parties are not sufficiently reflected in market prices. To correct this discrepancy, the
cornerstone of Volt’s climate policy is a comprehensive, ambitious, predictable and
credible carbon pricing scheme enforced by a strong EU. We aim to cover 100% of
emissions with two efficient, effective, market-based and technology-neutral instruments:
an expanded EU Emissions Trading System (ETS) which shall cover the vast majority of
5Connolly, D., Lund, H., & Mathiesen, B. V. (2016). Smart Energy Europe: The technical and economic impact
of one potential 100% renewable energy scenario for the European Union. Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews, 60, 1634-1653.
4 A model to estimate these targets based on the remaining carbon budget was developed by Felix Benning
and available at : https://felix-benning.shinyapps.io/emissionmodel.
3 “Net” emissions are actual (gross) emissions minus negative emissions (carbon absorption/sequestration).
4


sectors under one universal cap and one uniform price, complemented by a carbon tax
for such emissions where that is the more effective or efficient instrument. To prevent
carbon leakage to other countries and ensure a level playing field for all companies,
border carbon adjustments shall be implemented to level carbon prices for imports and
exports to and from the EU. Further, Volt understands the social hardship that a high
carbon price can cause and hence proposes the transparent redistribution of revenues
combined with economically sound investments in green research and development (R&D)
and infrastructure to fund the economic transition as fast as possible. The EU is working
on the revision of its climate, energy and transport-related legislation under the so-called
'Fit for 55’ package.6 Volt believes that some of these new measures, e.g., the Emission
Trading System (ETS) and the new Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism (CBAM), are a
step in the right direction. However, significant improvements are still necessary. Our
carbon pricing policy is outlined below.
A.Pricing Greenhouse Emissions
➢Extend the ETS to further sectors to cover at least 90% (2019 ca. 45%) of all EU
carbon emissions under a single cap by the end of 2022 at the latest, in order to
reduce emissions efficiently and predictably. All forms of fossil fuels shall be
included, independent of their usage, covering the sectors of energy supply,
industry7, transport, residential and commercial8. As a principle, apply regulation as
much “upstream” as possible, i.e., where fossil fuels (gas, oil, coal, etc) enter the
system (ports, pipelines, mines, etc) to simplify the administrative effort for both
companies and authorities.
➢Reduce the number of allowances (scope-adjusted) by 8 ppts each year (current
EU plan: 2.2 ppts each year) from 2020–2030 to net cut carbon emissions by 80%
until 2030 compared to 20209 and aim for a 100% reduction by 2040.
➢Introduce an EU-wide price corridor for EU ETS auctions and trade in order to
create predictability for investments (price floor) and prevent excessive prices
above the social cost of carbon (price ceiling). Volt suggests using the newly
introduced CO2e tax10 (see below) as a reference point and allowing the ETS price to
10CO 2e = CO 2 equivalents
9European Commission, EU Emissions Trading Scheme (EU ETS), available at
https://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/ets_en
8 https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/daviz/ghg-emissions-by-sector-in#tab-chart_1
7 B. J. Ruijven et al, 2016, “ Long-term model-based projections of energy use and CO2 emissions from the
global steel and cement industries ”, Resources, Conservation and Recycling
6 For more information on the EU's plan for a green transition and the new initiatives adopted, consult the
following link:
https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/policies/green-deal/eu-plan-for-a-green-transition/
5


vary within a +/-50% corridor of the CO2e tax.
➢Require the retirement (deletion) of certificates when national policies directly
reduce emissions in ETS sectors (e.g. feed-in-tariffs) to ensure the additionality of
such policies and to prevent the “waterbed effect”.11
➢Introduce a carbon tax for any sectors where an expanded ETS would cause
disproportionate administrative effort (e.g., highly fragmented industries that
can hardly be captured upstream).
➢Volt suggests a tax level in line with France’s originally planned CO2 price,
which is also in line with suggestions by the High-Level Commission on Carbon
Prices and the German Umweltbundesamt.12 That is 65.40 euros per tonne in
2021, gradually rising to 205 euros in 2030.13 14 15 CO2e pricing will be reviewed on a
regular basis, with the potential for further increases if necessary, but not
exceeding the range of scientific consensus on the global social cost of carbon.
➢Volt supports national CO2e pricing until there is a European solution. Although
Volt clearly favours an ETS over a carbon tax, Volt would support a strong carbon
tax at the European level as an intermediate solution/Plan B.
➢Prevent double taxation of emissions and respect the tax sovereignty of the
Member States by crediting national or regional CO2 taxes and levies against the
applicable EU CO2 price where they overlap.
➢End-to-end CO2e accounting standards shall be implemented until 2025 as a
basis for more precise border carbon adjustments (BCA), carbon footprint
declarations on products or the implementation of a carbon added tax (CAT). 16
Similarly, measurement and monitoring of emissions by geography, sector and
(large) company should be strengthened where needed in order to ensure a
transparent, reliable and trustworthy basis for carbon pricing.
➢Removed, captured or avoided greenhouse gas equivalents shall be included in
16 Today, there are no mandatory carbon accounting standards so that said use cases rely on approximations,
averages and estimates; that is not sufficient for nuanced carbon footprint calculations as needed to
compare competing products of the same category, and can lead to legal disputes, especially in case of high
CO2 prices
15 Methodological Convention 3.0 for the Assessment of Environmental Costs
14 Carbon Pricing Leadership Coalition, Report of the High-Level Commission on Carbon Prices
13 Carbon price variations in 2°C scenarios explored
12 Best practice: British Columbia, Canada, has put a price on burning fuels and introduced successfully a
Carbon Tax, available at https://www2.gov.bc.ca/gov
11 German Council of Economic Experts, Special Report 2019, “ Setting Out for a New Climate Policy ”
6


the ETS System where feasible, or lead to a refund equivalent to the CO2e tax
in order to create an incentive for greenhouse gas removal. This should include
both technological as well as natural forms of carbon sequestration as long as the
permanence of the removal can be ensured.17
B.Sector-Specific Regulation
➢The ETS must include land use, land use change, and forestry (LULUCF), with
each member state treated as a single emitter. While accounting will take place at
the EU level, each Member State will be free to respect their circumstances and
pursue their own strategy.18
➢The aviation industry should be included in the ETS without any exemptions,
incorporating all climate effects as CO2e to the best of our scientific
knowledge.19 20 21 22 Direct off-setting by the industry will not lead to a reduced
number of ETS certificates needed. In 2022, the amount of free allowances will be
reduced from 83% to 0%. In the long term, the EU should push for the alignment
of CORSIA to the ETS. 23 24
➢Ships operating in or entering European waters must pay a carbon price (ETS
or tax).25 26 27 The price shall apply to all vessels with a gross tonnage of more than
5,000 on a per-voyage berthing fee paid to the port authorities.
➢Agricultural emissions from livestock and soil should be taxed at the source
because they are local and fragmented. Other non-sector-specific emissions in the
agricultural sector (such as electricity and tractor fuels) will be covered by the ETS
27 I. Parry, D. Heine, K. Kizzier, T. Smith, 2018 “ Carbon Taxation for International Maritime Fuels: Assessing
the Options ”, ISBN: 9781484374559/1018-5941
26 A. Kachi, et al, 2019, “ Carbon pricing options for international and Maritime emissions ”, Newclimate.
25 In 2018, the International Maritime Organisation agreed on a 50% reduction of emissions for 2050.
Nevertheless, these reductions are not enough (available at Anderson(2012) and Kachi(2018) ) , and stronger
action is required to limit the temperature increase below 1.5 degrees with high probability.
24 Roadmap to decarbonising European Aviation
23 J. D. Scheelhaase, 2019, “ How to regulate aviation’s full climate impact as intended by the EUcouncil from
2020 onwards ”
22 H. A. Edwards, D. D. Hardy, Wadud, Z., 2006, “ Aircraft cost index and the future of carbon emissions from
air travel” http://www.esu-services.ch/fileadmin/download/jungbluth-2018-RFI-best-practice.pdf
21 ESU-Services, Aviation and Climate Change: Best Practice for Calculation of the Global Warming Potential,
available at www.esu.services
20 U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, The use of non- CO 2 multipliers for the climate
impact of aviation: The scientific basis found at www.icao.int
19 CEDelft, 2008, “Lower NOx at Higher altitudes: Policies to Reduce the Climate Impact of Aviation NOx
emissions”
18 E.g. Sweden demands three new trees planted for each tree cut; this proved successful since 1903
17 Note: solar geoengineering does not qualify as greenhouse gas removal.
7


mid- or upstream.
C.Carbon tariffs to create a level competitive playing
field and prevent carbon leakage
A strong carbon pricing system is the best mechanism to curb emissions. Yet, in our
interconnected world, the transition to a global sustainable economic system will succeed
only if industries with high emissions do not move to less regulated countries, thereby
both causing higher emissions elsewhere and weakening the European economy. We,
therefore, propose to
➢Implement comprehensive Border Carbon Adjustments (BCAs) at the EU’s
external borders, in order to prevent carbon leakage and create a level
competitive playing field between European and non-European companies.28
That means applying import adjustment taxes to products subject to lower carbon
prices in their countries of origin. Reimburse carbon price differences for exports to
such countries. End the practice of free allowance allotment (‘grandfathering’) to
entire companies or industries.
➢Border tax adjustments must be implemented not only on selected domestic,
CO2-intensive industries in global competition, but also on a wide range of
imported goods, in order to shift consumption to more sustainable products
through the price mechanism.29 30
➢Use any net gains from import and export adjustments to fund the global
climate change adaptation fund and the green climate fund31, both of which
were established under the Paris Agreement but are currently underfunded.
31 https://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/international/finance_en
30 Böhringer, C., Carbone, J.C., and Rutherford, T.F. (2012), ‘Unilateral Climate Policy Design: Efficiency and
Equity Implications of Alternative Instruments to Reduce Carbon Leakage’, Energy Economics 34: 208-217
29 https://climatestrategies.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/CS_report-Dec-2017-4.pdf
28 Carbon border adjustments are (today) among the most universally proposed policies as a complement to
any domestic carbon price to prevent carbon leakage https://www.clcouncil.org/economists-statement/ ; see
also
https://www.sachverstaendigenrat-wirtschaft.de/en/special-report-2019.html , point 17 and
https://www.economist.com/the-economist-explains/2017/02/17/are-carbon-tariffs-a-good-idea
8


I. Energy Transition in the European
Energy System
Our current society and economy are built on the assumption that energy demand
dictates supply. To reduce the negative effects on our ecosystem, Volt suggests:
➢Shifting to green energy sources and engaging directly with citizens to ensure a
transition towards more sustainable ways of living and use of energy. The transition
to a sustainable European system calls for changes in the electricity markets with
the use of alternative and carbon-free sources of energy to achieve the full
decarbonization of the energy system by 2035.
Recent developments in the security landscape of Europe, for instance, the Russian war of
aggression in Ukraine, highlight the need for strengthening European energy sovereignty.
In particular, it has made reducing the EU’s energy dependency on Russian imports,
especially of oil and gas, imperative and urgent. To this end, Volt suggests
➢Imposing additional EU-wide targets for reductions in fossil energy use to
compensate for the loss of energy imports from Russia as early as possible.
A.Electricity Market
As for the electricity market, we propose to:
➢Promote the liberalisation of electricity markets, especially at the retail level;
encourage consumers to switch to green power suppliers through transparent
pricing and reduced switching barriers to guarantee effective market competition;
separate the ownership of power generation, transmission, distribution, and
retailing; and allow direct bilateral agreements between suppliers and consumers.32
➢Optimise
the
coordinated
network
of
cross-border
Transmission
Systems
Operators (TSOs) for efficient energy management and international market
functioning beyond country-based limits.
➢Adopt nodal dynamic electricity pricing33 throughout the EU to account for
33 Hogan, W. W. (2005). On an “energy only” electricity market design for resource adequacy. Available at:
32 International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA). (2017). Adapting market design to high shares of variable
renewable energy. Available at:
https://www.irena.org/-/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2017/May/IRENA_Adapting_Market_Design
_VRE_2017.pdf.
9


network constraints across political borders; ensure economic dispatching, subject
to transmission and operational constraints;34 well-aligned generation, demand,
and network management; and adequate investment incentives.35 36
➢Harmonise market regulation throughout Europe to guarantee a free flow of
energy in response to thoroughly dynamic electricity prices, thereby improving
market efficiency, fostering new forms of generation and storage, and minimising
the need for fossil fuel power plants as back-up for intermittent renewable
generation capacity.
➢Adopt smart metres and variable pricing EU-wide, making both available to all
consumers, improving grid stability and incentivising efficient usage of energy.
➢Empower citizens to contribute easily to the green transition by providing free
access to energy grids and removing private feed-in caps.
B.Renewable Energy System
Regarding the renewable energy system, we propose to:
➢Promote a diversified portfolio of renewable energy sources (RES) to enhance
flexibility and reflect its value in the market price.37 To enable a mix of
intermittent and mutually complementing sustainable energy sources, further
research on geothermal energy should be promoted, alongside research on ocean
thermal energy conversion, tidal and wave energy, residual heat from industry,
biomass, and new designs for solar and wind energy. Furthermore, research in
alternative technologies should be promoted, including low-carbon and disruptive
37 Verzijlbergh, R. A., De Vries, L. J., Dijkema, G. P. J., & Herder, P. M. (2017). Institutional challenges caused by
the integration of renewable energy sources in the European electricity sector. Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews, 75, 660-667.
36Borggrefe, F., & Neuhoff, K. (2011). Balancing and intraday market design: Options for wind integration,
German Institute for Economic Research, DIW Berlin.
35 Neuhoff, K., Hobbs, B. F., & Newbery, D. M. (2011). Congestion management in European power networks:
criteria to assess the available options. German Institute for Economic Research, DIW Berlin.
34Verzijlbergh, R. A., De Vries, L. J., Dijkema, G. P. J., & Herder, P. M. (2017). Institutional challenges caused by
the integration of renewable energy sources in the European electricity sector. Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews, 75, 660-667.
https://sites.hks.harvard.edu/fs/whogan/Hogan_Energy_Only_092305.pdf.
10


technologies such as sustainable chemistry concepts,38 bio-based solutions, and
organic39
and
plastic
waste-to-fuel
concepts,
with
particular
emphasis
on
large-scale applications.
➢Promote the total phase-out of coal by 2030 (lignite by 2025), prohibit new
permits to drill for fossil fuels, and eliminate flaring immediately.40 In addition, 80%
of all known fossil fuel reserves should be left in the ground.41 The advertising of
fossil
fuel
products
should
be
prohibited,
similar
to
bans
on
cigarette
advertisements.
➢Make use of existing infrastructure for Power-to-Gas, Gas-to-Power, and
hydrogen. Adapt the current fossil fuel storage and generation infrastructure to
use renewable fuels.42
➢Support intensified deployment of smart electricity grids at the European level
to provide a stable and clean energy system based on volatile electricity
generation. Relevant grid data should be available from system operations to
encourage innovation in clean-tech.43
➢Introduce an EU-wide infrastructure of high voltage “electricity motorways”
and storage systems, funded by the EU budget, to facilitate an integrated
renewable energy system via both load balancing and energy transport across
43Medjroubi, W., Müller, U. P., Scharf, M., Matke, C., & Kleinhans, D. (2017). Open data in power grid modelling:
new approaches towards transparent grid models. Energy Reports, 3, 14-21.
42 Bothe, D. & Janssen, M. (2018). The importance of the gas infrastructure for Germany’s Energy Transition.
Frontier Economics. Available at: https://fsr.eui.eu/wp-content/uploads/2the-importance-of-gas.pdf
41 Change, I. C. (2014). Mitigation of climate change. Contribution of working group III to the fifth assessment
report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change, 1454, 147.
40 Flaring operations result in around 270 MtCO2 of emissions, while the gas could be utilised or stored. For
more information, consult: International Energy Agency, 2019, “Flaring Emissions”. Available at:
https://www.iea.org/tcep/fuelsupply/flaring/.
39 Skaggs, R. L., Coleman, A. M., Seiple, T. E., & Milbrandt, A. R. (2018). Waste-to-Energy biofuel production
potential for selected feedstocks in the conterminous United States. Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews, 82, 2640-2651.
38 Blum, C., Bunke, D., Hungsberg, M., Roelofs, E., Joas, A., Joas, R., ... & Stolzenberg, H. C. (2017). The concept
of sustainable chemistry: Key drivers for the transition towards sustainable development. Sustainable
Chemistry and Pharmacy, 5, 94-104.
11


countries and large distances.44 45 46
➢Simplify regulation for approvals and embrace participatory financing schemes
for RES infrastructure in order to accelerate RES deployment and make citizens
and municipalities benefit financially.
➢Enable and advocate for decentralised and autonomous energy generation as
well as supply and regional distribution structures. Installation of energy storage at
home and on the grid level should be promoted through incentives or tax
deductions.
➢Foster the deployment of demand response systems by putting their providers
at the same level of policy and regulation as generation and storage capacity, to
expand the availability of zero-carbon balancing capacity, thereby complementing
intermittent renewables at virtually zero capital expenditure.
➢Support research on the economic, technological and behavioural aspects of
energy systems within the proposed EU Agency for Climate Action in order to
help monitor and assess the supply and demand of energy for businesses and
decision-makers.
➢Strengthen the harmonisation of technology and engineering standards across
Member States to increase energy efficiency and reduce waste. Specifically,
update the EN 50160 to align voltage levels (“precision supply”) after the
withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the
European Union.
➢Promote enhanced and harmonised financing of relevant infrastructure for
centralised and decentralised energy solutions.
46 Czisch, G. & Schmid, J. (2014), Low Cost but Totally Renewable Electricity Supply for a Huge Supply Area - a
European/Transeuropean Example. Citeseerx. Available at:
https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.165.3156
45 Redl, C., & Pescia, D. (2015). The European Power System in 2030: Flexibility Challenges and Integration
Benefits. Study performed by Fraunhofer IWES on behalf of Agora Energiewende. Available at:
https://www.agora-energiewende.de/en/publications/?tx_agorathemen_themenliste%5Bprodukt%5D=968
&cHash=20c2e80ea407d6e7488e24d21997761f.
44 Zappa, W., Junginger, M., & Van Den Broek, M. (2019). Is a 100% renewable European power system
feasible by 2050?. Applied energy, 233, 1027-1050.
12


C.Nuclear Energy
Nuclear energy is a low-carbon and low-land use dispatchable source of energy and
method for electricity generation.47 Concerns over the risks surrounding nuclear waste,
nuclear material proliferation, and nuclear accidents remain and loom over public
discourse. However, given the unprecedented challenge of the transition towards a
low-carbon European electricity system, nuclear energy is an important technology to
achieve the desired timeline for climate neutrality.
Volt’s primary goal is a world free of human-generated greenhouse gas emissions,
ultimately achieving the goal of limiting global climate change to 1.5° Celsius. Therefore, it
is necessary to balance options for fast and large-scale CO2 reduction, where the
advantages of nuclear energy generation can play an important role, against the potential
risks of nuclear energy.
From a financial perspective, nuclear energy has both benefits and drawbacks. On one
hand, a significant part of the scientific community agrees that the inclusion of
dispatchable sources, such as nuclear, hydropower or geothermal, is expected to reduce
the total system cost of a fully decarbonised energy portfolio.48 Nuclear energy also has
low operation, maintenance, and fuel costs. On the other hand, nuclear energy requires
high upfront capital expenditure, which is sensitive to increases in the cost of capital and
project
delays.49
Decommissioning
and
waste
disposal
also
require
substantial
investments.50 Finally, the liability regimes for nuclear accidents are limited.
In consideration of these complexities, we are advancing a specific proposal to harness
nuclear energy’s full potential. To achieve this goal, Volt proposes clear EU-wide guidelines
for the development, construction, and operation of all types of nuclear reactors. These
guidelines will require Member States to ensure safe provision for the continued
operation of current nuclear reactors. In line with these requirements, investments in
research and development into new kinds of nuclear fission and fusion technologies
should be incentivised to reduce levels of waste produced in operations, and to promote
the transition to new generations of nuclear reactors. The goal is to ensure the safest
50 European Commission. (2016). Nuclear Illustrative Programme Presented under Article 40 of the Euratom
Treaty for the Opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee. Available at:
https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/documents/1_EN_autre_document_travail_service_part1_v10.p
df.
49 Gamboa Palacios, S. S., & Jansen, J. J. (2018). Nuclear energy economics: An update to fact finding nuclear
energy (No. TNO 2018 P11577). TNO.
48 Sepulveda, N. A., Jenkins, J. D., de Sisternes, F. J., & Lester, R. K. (2018). The role of firm low-carbon
electricity resources in deep decarbonization of power generation. Joule, 2(11), 2403-2420.
47 Nuclear energy has one of the lowest life cycle CO2 emissions, together with wind energy and other
renewable energy sources (page, 1335). Change, C. (2007). Working Group III: Mitigation of Climate Change.
Available at: http://www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/ar4/wg3/en/ch11s11-es.html.
13


possible usage of nuclear energy, to i) support and stabilise power grids, ii) enable
alternative uses of nuclear energy for industrial and research purposes where appropriate
and necessary, and iii) still pursue our ultimate goal of achieving a truly sustainable energy
supply.
Ongoing development and usage of new nuclear technologies:
➢Promote research and support the adoption of advanced nuclear fission and
fusion concepts, such as thorium cycles, molten salt, liquid-metal, Gen4, fast
breeder, or small modular reactors, as well as the use of research reactors and
nuclear radioisotopes for other low-risk applications such as medicine, food
sterilisation, and space exploration.
Conditions for the construction of new nuclear reactors, including safety, waste, and
financial transparency:
➢Allow new reactors only if they are inherently safe;51 that is, no active safety
systems are required to bring the operation into a safe state of shut-down
(so-called walk-away safe). In addition, robustness against outside influences must
be included, such as the consequences of climate change,52 and human threats (i.e.,
terrorist attacks or war).
➢Require operators to consult publicly with local authorities and citizens in the
discussion around new nuclear reactor projects. Operators must provide full
information on the environmental and economic benefits as well as risks, and
organise open public forums for exchange between operators, citizens, and local
councillors,53 strengthening the legal rights of the European population near
power plants. Financial participation and indemnification shall apply to all citizens
equally based on the area of impact, no matter which country they live in.
➢Ensure that byproducts of energy production are retaken and recycled whenever
possible, or otherwise placed in safe long-term storage.
53 https://ec.europa.eu/environment/aarhus/.
52 Kromp-Kolb, H., Muellner, N., Kim, D., Holy, J., Syri, S., Caneill, J. Y., ... & Obreja, C. (2021). Climate Change:
Assessment of the Vulnerability of Nuclear Power Plants and Approaches for their Adaptation (No.
NEA--7207). Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development. Available at:
https://www.oecd-nea.org/jcms/pl_61802/climate-change-assessment-of-the-vulnerability-of-nuclear-power-
plants-and-approaches-for-their-adaptation?details=true.
51 "Safety related terms for advanced nuclear plants". Directory of National Competent Authorities' Approval
Certificates for Package Design, Special Form Material and Shipment of Radioactive Material. Vienna, Austria:
International Atomic Energy Agency: 1–20. September 1991. ISSN 1011-4289. IAEA-TECDOC-626.
14


➢Ensure the proven availability of a suitable long-term nuclear waste storage
facility, taking into account the rate of waste generation and storage conditions, as
well as the risk landscape (including, but not limited to, geological and geopolitical
factors). All possible mitigations should be employed to minimise risks of accidental
contamination to acceptable or marginal levels that would be equivalent to average
background radiation levels. Risk assessments should be provided by independent
third parties.
➢Mandatory liability insurance, covering the true costs of accidents within the
whole chain of nuclear power (cradle to grave), including radioactive waste
and waste management. We believe that all individual insurance policies have to
cover the risk of nuclear power accidents while ensuring that the financial burden
of accidents is not externalised to taxpayers and society. Any energy supply utility
should internalise the full risk-costs of accidents.54
The scale of the energy transition challenge means that existing nuclear reactors can also
be a major contributor to achieving the desired timeline for reaching carbon neutrality.
As a result, the following derogations apply to existing nuclear reactors that are unable
to meet the aforementioned requirements:
➢Allow the build and operation of already approved reactors under the
respective agreed-upon contractual obligations.
➢Allow existing reactors to continue operating in their current form until the
agreed-upon end of their lifecycle. At this point in time, the reactors must either
be decommissioned, refurbished, or integrated into a new cycle environment
to achieve the technological development as mentioned above, to produce
lower and shorter-lived levels of radioactive waste, and to have inherent safety.
Runtime extensions for current-generation nuclear reactors (which produce
comparatively high levels of waste with long half-lives) will be prohibited once
either i) next-generation nuclear technologies with significantly lower levels of
waste are available and economically viable to operators, or ii) sustainable energy
sources (such as solar or wind power) have spread widely enough to meet energy
demands.
➢Create a long-term spent fuel and waste management policy for the EU,
including by reforming the Radioactive Waste and Spent Fuel Management
Directive.55 This must include making waste producers financially and legally
55 Source: European Commission on radioactive waste and spent fuel. Available at:
https://ec.europa.eu/energy/en/topics/nuclear-energy/radioactive-waste-and-spent-fuel
54 Pearce, J.M. 2012. Limitations of Nuclear Power as a Sustainable Energy Source. Sustainability
https://doi.org/10.3390/su4061173 .
15


responsible for decommissioning, spent fuel and waste management (under strict
supervision of independent controllers and regulators), and finding, accepting,
and
building an adequate location for final storage of waste materials.
Coordination between Member States and waste producers is essential as a final
storage facility has minimal marginal costs for increased material.
➢Promote the adoption of closed-fuel cycle options to reduce the volume and
duration of radioactive waste and promote the production of fully sustainable
waste management systems.
➢Ensure that runtime extensions are permitted only if: (1) all safety regulations
valid at the time of the decision are met; (2) long-term operations are performed
at the full cost of the operator;56 (3) the latest level of technological
advancements at the time of the evaluation are achieved; (4) needed to ensure
climate neutrality;
➢Allow for earlier decommission of nuclear reactors based on the principle of
subsidiarity, for instance when the population closer to the nuclear reactors is in
favour
of
a
complete nuclear exit, under all considerations of political,
environmental, climate, and economic consequences as Europe moves to achieve
climate neutrality.
➢Decommission or require repairs/refurbishments to nuclear reactors whenever
the established safety protocols are not met or the planned end of their lifecycle
is reached. 57 58
D.Bioenergy
Volt does not see biofuels as a solution for widespread use as long as large plantation
schemes cause serious second-order environmental risks such as deforestation and
58 Suh, Y. A. et al. 2018. Decisions on Nuclear Energy Decommissioning: A Historical Review. Progress in
Nuclear Energy: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2018.02.001 .
57 OECD-NEA, 2016. Costs of decommissioning Nuclear Power Plants.
https://www.oecd-nea.org/jcms/pl_14910/costs-of-decommissioning-nuclear-power-plants?details=true .
56 Duchac, A., Bruynooghe, C., & Martin, O. (2011). Operation of Ageing Reactors: Approaches and associated
Research in the European Union. Available at:
https://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/bitstream/JRC68051/reqno_jrc68051_pdf%20version%5B1
%5D.pdf.
16


food crop competition.59 Nevertheless, without alternatives of the same energy
density, biofuels may be necessary for certain applications. Volt thus supports its
sustainable use and corresponding research and development.
➢Ensure sustainable practices for biomass production by encouraging local
sourcing, the use of waste biomass, and by avoiding damage to the local
environment or inefficient energy crops competing with food. The EU’s RED
directive has to be reformed to avoid uncompensated wood harvesting for
bioenergy production.60 Bioenergy for energy production should thus
remain within adequate sustainable limits.
60 The European parliament recently included wood harvesting for bioenergy production as
a source of renewable low-carbon energy (Searchinger et al, 2018) . This would increase emissions by 10%
due to slow incomplete forest recovery and would encourage other nations, such as Brazil with the Amazons,
to do so.
59 Fargione, J., Hill, J., Tilman, D., Polasky, S., & Hawthorne, P. (2008). Land clearing and the biofuel carbon
debt. Science, 319(5867), 1235-1238.
17


II. Transportation Revolution
We need to make large investments in infrastructure, introduce new regulations,
taxes, and subsidies, and induce behavioural changes to obtain a decarbonized
transportation system. We therefore need to shift public spending from airports
and roads towards sustainable transport infrastructure. Volt will support all forms
of environmentally-friendly travel, including bicycles, emission-free and shared
mobility, as well as an integrated European rail network.
A.Road and Mobility
➢Establish sustainable infrastructure in cities by exploring possibilities and
harmonising regulations for green zones in towns larger than 50,000 people;61
expanding city public transport capabilities; creating bicycle-friendly zones and bike
lanes; promoting sharing solutions; and introducing free public parking slots for
electric cars.
➢Ban the use of fossil fuels in road vehicles by 2035. This does not ban the sale or
use of internal combustion engines as long as they burn biofuels or synfuels.
➢Redirect subsidies to R&D, purchase, and refuelling infrastructure deployment
for zero-emission vehicles and net-zero carbon fuels like sustainably produced
synfuels.
➢Modernise the transportation systems in Europe for short and long distances.
This includes the promotion of innovative road charge solutions62 as well as the
development of coherent re-charging station networks throughout Europe and
within the cities.
➢Promote smart dynamic road traffic management infrastructure to reduce
62 Best practice example of Sweden. See Electrive, eRoadArlanda – Swedish road charges EVs while driving.
61 Source: The European Commission’s website on urban access regulations in Europe. Available at:
https://urbanaccessregulations.eu.
18


congestion63 and enforce reduced speed limits.64
➢Extend energy efficiency obligations to the transport sector to discourage the
use of fossil fuels65. Efficiency in the transportation sector includes RES integration
(biofuels and electric motors), and may ultimately promote the use of public
transportation.
B.European Rail Transportation
➢Propose considerable EU-wide investments and subsidies on all levels of rail
transportation, such as integrated long- and medium distance railway networks for
goods and passengers, a European High Speed Rail (HSR) network,66 as well as
regional and local public transport.
➢Harmonise infrastructure across Europe, in particular with regard to the
European Train Control System (ETCS), platform height, track gauge and the
approval of railway vehicles.
➢Expand and improve national and international night train services as a
convenient alternative to air travel.
C.Revolutionising Aviation
➢Abolish taxation exemptions on aircraft fuel67
68. The tax will apply to all
European flights, but there will be exemptions for primary residents of remote
European regions.
68European Citizens’ Initiative, Fairosene, available at https://fairosene.eu/
67 According to CEDelft, although it would have a negative impact on aviation employment within the EU
(11% reduction), it would decrease CO2 emissions by 11% and noise pollution by 8% while having negligible
impact on the total employment and GDP. For more information, consult: Delft, C. E. (2019). Taxes in the
Field of Aviation and their impact. Final Report.
66 IEA (2017). Energy use can be 90% lower than for aviation, Energy Technology Perspectives, Catalysing
Energy Technology Transformations. International Energy Agency. Available at:
https://www.iea.org/etp2017/.
65 IRENA (2017), Adapting market design to high shares of variable renewable energy. International
Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi. Available at:
https://www.irena.org/-/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2017/May/IRENA_Adapting_Market_Design
_VRE_2017.pdf
64 By reducing speed limits from 120 km/h to 110 km/h, a 2-18% of emission reductions could be attained.
See also Sobrino, N., & Monzon, A. (2018). Towards Low-Carbon Interurban Road Strategies: Identifying Hot
Spots Road Corridors in Spain. Sustainability, 10(11), 3963.
63 As with carbon-activated concrete and other alternatives.
19


➢Increase efforts to achieve net zero emissions in European international and
domestic aviation by 2040 through the aviation advisory council (ACARE).
➢Increase funding for green aviation to go beyond current concepts with limited
potential based on evolutionary designs and aim at revolutionary concepts69.
Encourage
R&D
programmes
for
environmentally
friendly
aircraft
and
infrastructure.70 71 72 73 74
➢Promote more efficient air traffic operations such as continuous climb &
descent
operations,
European
cross-border
free-route
airspace,
airport
collaborative decision making75 and sustainable fleet routing for contrail formation
avoidance76 77 through the Single European Sky programme.
➢Improve legislation to facilitate sustainable aviation by improving the flexibility
of the flight ticket market with name-swap and re-selling regulations. Furthermore,
removing frequent flying programs78, limiting aircraft operational age79, speed
79 Early commercial aircraft replacement by new more efficient models could significantly reduce emissions.
For more information, consult: Schäfer, A. W., Evans, A. D., Reynolds, T. G., & Dray, L. (2016). Costs of
mitigating CO2 emissions from passenger aircraft. Nature Climate Change, 6(4), 412-417.
78 As incentives for more touristic and business flights are increasing the carbon footprint. For more
information, consult: Cohen, S. A., Higham, J. E., & Cavaliere, C. T. (2011). Binge flying: Behavioural addiction
and climate change. Annals of Tourism Research, 38(3), 1070-1089.
77 Frömming, C., Ponater, M., Dahlmann, K., Grewe, V., Lee, D. S., & Sausen, R. (2012). Aviation‐induced
radiative forcing and surface temperature change in dependency of the emission altitude. Journal of
Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 117(D19).
76Grewe, V., Frömming, C., Matthes, S., Brinkop, S., Ponater, M., Dietmüller, S., ... & Hullah, P. (2014). Aircraft
routing with minimal climate impact: The REACT4C climate cost function modelling approach (V1. 0).
Geoscientific Model Development, 7(1), 175-201.
75 EEA, EASA, Eurocontrol (2019). European Aviation Environmental Report 2016. Publication of the European
Environmental Agency, the European Aviation Safety Agency and the European Organisation for safety of air
navigation. Available at:
https://www.easa.europa.eu/eaer/system/files/usr_uploaded/219473_EASA_EAER_2019_WEB_LOW-RES.pd
f
74EEEA, EASA (2016). European Aviation Environmental Report 2016. Publication of the European
Environmental Agency, the European Aviation Safety Agency and the European Organisation for safety of air
navigation. Available at:
https://www.easa.europa.eu/eaer/system/files/usr_uploaded/European%20Aviation%20Environmental%20
Report%202016%20-72dpi.pdf
73 Such as with electrification of airport operations.
72 Electro fuels, which require a massive investment in new renewable power generation, are a more
sustainable alternative to biofuels and can serve as a bridging function until hydrogen or electrical aircraft
are fully developed. For more information, consult: Murphy, A., Earl, T., Hemmings, B., Calvo Ambel, C.,
Buffet, L., Gilliam, L., & Sihvonen, J. (2018). Roadmap to decarbonising European aviation. Transport &
Environment: Brussels, Belgium.
71 Roth, A., & Schmidt, P. (2017). Power-to-liquids: A new pathway to renewable jet fuel. Icao. int. Available at:
https://www.icao.int/Meetings/altfuels17/Documents/20170208_ROTH_V1-0_submitted.pdf.
70 For example, synthetic “electro” fuels, hybrid, hydrogen and electrical aircrafts.
69Source: ICAO (2016). “Environmental Report”. Available at:
https://www.icao.int/environmental-protection/Pages/ENV2016.aspx.
20


limitations80, and halting the expansion of airports should be considered unless
there is an ETS price of at least 50 €/ton.
D.Maritime Industry and Shipping
➢Aim for net zero emissions in European waters by 203581 82, create a dedicated
EU agency and initiate public-private partnerships for technological development
and implementation.
➢Support the inclusion of all EU seas as an emission control area83. Further
measures may follow, like a 30% speed reduction for high-emission ocean ships.84 85
➢Invest in transparent, publicly accessible monitoring and reporting of CO2
emissions for all vessels above 5000 GT in European waters86, while pushing for
cost-effective techniques to include smaller ships.
➢Promote
shore-to-ship
power
(SSP)
supply
for
ships
at
berth through
harmonised legislation based on best practises and focusing on all European ports,
both seashore and inland, with a particular emphasis on the cruise industry.87
87 In accordance with Directive 2014/94/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 October
2014 on the deployment of alternative fuels infrastructure.
86 EU (2015) Regulation (EU) 2015/757 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2015 on the
monitoring, reporting and verification of carbon dioxide emissions from maritime transport, and amending
Directive 2009/16/EC.
85IPCC. I (2014), Fifth Assessment Synthesis Report, Chapter 8: Transport. Available at:
https://www.ipcc.ch/assessment-report/ar5/.
84 A speed reduction of 30% would reduce 33% of emissions by 2030. This would be nonexistent forships
using E-fuels, electric or other non fossil fuel based propulsion. For more information, consult: Faber, J. F.,
Huigen, T., & Nelissen, D. (2017). Regulating speed: a short-term measure to reduce maritime GHG emissions. CE
Delft.
83 For greenhouse gases and other pollutants.
82 OECD/ITF (2018). Decarbonising Maritime Transport: Pathways to zero-carbon shipping by 2035.
International Transport Forum. Available at:
https://www.itf-oecd.org/sites/default/files/docs/decarbonising-maritime-transport.pdf.
81 In 2018, the International Maritime Organisation agreed on a 50% reduction of emissions for 2050 .
Nevertheless, these reductions are not enough, and more efforts are required to achieve a high probability
of limiting the temperature increase below 1.5 degrees. Available at: Anderson(2012) and Kachi (2018).
80 Abergel, T., Brown, A., Cazzola, P., Dockweiler, S., Dulac, J., Pales, A. F., ... & West, K. (2017). Energy
technology perspectives 2017: Catalysing energy technology transformations. OECD. Available at:
https://www.iea.org/etp2017/.
21


III. Sustainable Buildings
With 36% of the EU’s GHG emissions88, of which 13% are caused on-site89, the building
sector (residential and commercial) is one of the largest contributors to emissions.
Moreover, construction and buildings account for half of all extracted materials, half of
all energy consumption, 1/3 of all water consumption, and 1/3 of all waste in the EU.90
While technical solutions for a near-zero emission building stock do exist, legal,
financial, and behavioural hurdles need to be addressed.
To make the building sector carbon-neutral, changes are needed (lifecycle
perspective):
➢Replacement
of
individual
fossil-fueled
heating
and
cooling
installations with alternatives such as renewably powered electric
heating, heat pumps, and solar water heating.
➢Better
energy
efficiency
(insulation,
energy-saving
appliances,
behavioural change, etc.) - Use of sustainable building materials when
constructing new or renovating existing buildings.
Volt supports the EU’s current direction (the EPBD – the Energy Performance of Buildings
Directive) which addresses these components. However, the sector must change more
radically from finite fossil-based resources toward renewable, zero-waste materials. Volt
supports measures that accelerate this transition through modernised legislation and
advocates for stronger, pan-European and more innovative policies.
➢Set near-zero energy building (nZEB) standards for all new buildings in the EU
by 2030 and net zero emissions for all buildings (including existing building stock)
by 2035.
90 https://www.architecture.com/-/media/GatherContent/Test-resources-page/Additional-Documents/RIBA
SustainableOutcomesGuide2019pdf.pdf
89 Source: European Environment Agency. Available at:
https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/daviz/ghg-emissions-by-aggregated-sector-2#tab-dashboard-01.
88 https://ec.europa.eu/energy/en/topics/energy-efficiency/energy-performance-of-buildings/overview
22


➢Develop standards for resource-efficient design and integrated construction
processes. Measure the efficiency of building design with both the annual “in-use”
energy and the carbon footprint of the overall construction process (Differentiate
between “Operational Carbon” and “Embodied Carbon”). Mapping91 buildings by
continual energy performance data will allow consensus on the meaning of
sustainable design and also allow access to accurate measurement of “Whole Life
Carbon” within the building lifecycle.92
➢Enable owners of homes and offices to make the necessary investments by
harmonising and increasing public financing and by offering direct low-interest
financing from the European Investment Bank (EIB). Raise awareness and engage
citizens about the possibilities of green buildings.93
➢Promote cost-effective energy efficiency measures94 and develop standards to
support the integration of renewable energy generation into the design of new
buildings95 to shift towards carbon-neutrality in the construction sector. Volt wants
to support sustainable and resource-efficient building and living research and
enforce the European legislation on “Clean Energy for All Europeans”96 by restoring
and modernising older buildings and designing new buildings to save energy and
water.
➢By modernising legislation, we can overcome legal hurdles to making existing
buildings more energy efficient. E.g., lower restrictions for landlords to recoup
investment costs for energy efficiency renovations through rent adjustments as
long as the tenant overall also benefits through energy bill savings. Do not soften
architectural preservation rules so that Europe’s cultural heritage remains intact.
➢Embrace
the
opportunities
that
new
business
models
like performance
contracting and energy service companies offer.
➢Encourage the development of a properly sized and well qualified retrofit
industry through training, labour mobility, and best practice sharing.
96 European Commission (2016). Communication on Clean Energy For All Europeans. EUR-LEX. Available at:
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52016DC0860.
95 A best practice comes from the United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) in Denmark.
94 For example, better insulation, temperature regulating systems, thermal solar energy for warm water, and
higher efficiency equipment, including green heat pumps.
93 Saheb, Y., Shnapp, S., & Paci, D. (2019). From nearly-zero energy buildings to net-zero energy districts.
Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union. doi: https://doi. org/10.2760/693662.
92 https://www.thinkwood.com/clt100book, https://www.sidewalklabs.com
91 Live and interactive map of energy use on buildings.
https://www.chalmers.se/en/areas-of-advance/buildingfutures/profileareas/Pages/Virtual-City-at-Chalmers.
aspx
23


➢Create incentives for innovative buildings to have a positive environmental
impact that beats net-zero targets. Innovate through knowledge transfer by
bringing design, engineering, and construction sectors together.
➢Engage citizens and architects to raise awareness about the possibilities of
combining contemporary design with architectural conservation.
➢Develop a digital construction platform where architects and policymakers
collaborate to address the impacts of climate change on a large scale with
community engagement.
➢Sustainable water use and biodiversity are to be incorporated into the planning
approval process for land developments. (to be developed further).
24


IV. Sustainable Agriculture & Land Use,
and Natural Carbon Capture
Reducing carbon emissions is only one side of the story. The other side is carbon
capture. While there have been some efforts to capture emissions directly, they have
not had a significant impact.97 Healthy ecosystems are essential to long-term carbon
capture
(“negative
emissions”)98.
Ecosystem
restoration
is therefore vital to
rebuilding nature’s capacity to capture carbon99. One of the greatest causes of
ecosystem destruction is agriculture100, which used 41% of the land in Europe in
2015.101
In addition to protecting ecosystems from unscrupulous land use, industrial
agriculture must be reformed. Many current agricultural practises destroy ecosystems
(the IPCC estimates land use accounts for 23% of GHGs102) and should be replaced with
sustainable practises to make agriculture a GHG sink, not only carbon zero103. This is
also known as regenerative agriculture.104 Volt wants to phase out subsidies for all
agricultural practises that degrade soil, cause erosion or load water bodies with
harmful chemicals. Subsidies must be directed toward any agricultural practises that
improve topsoil, capture GHGs, protect water bodies, promote biodiversity, and stop or
reverse erosion.
➢Utilise natural carbon capturing by increasing efforts in sustainable forest
104 https://regenerationinternational.org/
103 J. Russel Smith wrote an important book on this topic, in
1929:https://soilandhealth.org/wp-content/uploads/01aglibrary/010175.tree%20crops.pdf; see also
http://amazingcarbon.com/JONES-LightFarmingFINAL(2018).pdf, http://carbonfarmingsolution.com/,
https://www.amazon.com/dp/B00557Z0OE, https://savory.global/climate-change-cause-remedy/,
http://waterparadigm.org/,
https://www.dw.com/en/ipcc-report-the-world-gets-hungrier-but-the-land-is-exhausted-from-us-and-from-cli
mate-change/a-4 9783271
102 https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2019/08/4.-SPM_Approved_Microsite_FINAL.pdf
101 https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Land_use_statistics
100 https://www.dw.com/en/opinion-science-guides-un-actions-to-curb-land-degradation/a-50268049
99 E.g. see
https://www.dw.com/en/scotland-restores-its-peatlands-to-keep-carbon-in-the-ground/a-50915166
98 See (and the IPCC report linked therein):
https://www.dw.com/en/ipcc-report-the-world-gets-hungrier-but-the-land-is-exhausted-from-us-and-from-cli
mate-change/a-49783271 ; https://www.naturalclimate.solutions/
97
https://theconversation.com/its-time-to-accept-carbon-capture-has-failed-heres-what-we-should-do-instead-
82929
25


management, restoration and afforestation105. Agricultural and forestry practices
shall be focused on emission reduction and landscape preservation106 and aim at
pre-industrial levels of terrestrial carbon stocks in Europe and combating
desertification.
➢Push for conservation and restoration of wetlands107. Focus on peatlands
(which can store twice as much carbon as forests108) by imposing an immediate
moratorium on peat exploitation until legislation is strengthened to ensure its
protection and sustainable management109, in addition to actively restoring
already exploited peatlands to their natural state.110
➢Stop subsidising unsustainable agricultural practises and use existing subsidies
to promote eco-friendly practices, that build up topsoil111 and reduce the need for
fertiliser, pesticides and insecticides and diesel use. Volt sees a lot of potential in
current research and development of practices like perennial and polycultural
agricultural production systems, but there are also other promising
possible solutions.
➢Increase the number of protected wildlife areas, as per the UN biodiversity plan112.
Ensure the protection of European natural parks with increased funding and
firmness against illegal practises113 and create an exploitation map to enable all
citizens to recognise and report illegal actions performed.
➢Create a European strategy to assess the material needs for the transition,
coordinate key resource processing and extraction, and push for its global
extension.114 115
115 P. v. Exter, et al, 2018, “ Could a rare metals shortage disrupt the global
114 International Energy Agency, 2019, “ Material efficiency in clean energy transitions ”
113 European natural areas, such as Doñana natural space , are under constant threat as a consequence of
illegal groundwater extraction and political inaction.
112 https://www.cbd.int/doc/c/efb0/1f84/a892b98d2982a829962b6371/wg2020-02-03-en.pdf
111 See point 5 of http://www.fao.org/3/I9900EN/i9900en.pdf
110
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2019/dec/28/danish-farmers-plan-to-flood-land-peat-bog-carbon-emiss
ions
109 https://www.iucn.org/resources/issues-briefs/peatlands-and-climate-change
108
https://www.unenvironment.org/news-and-stories/story/peatlands-store-twice-much-carbon-all-worlds-fore
sts
107 https://www.intechopen.com/books/wetlands-management-assessing-risk-and-sustainable-solutions
106 IPCC, Fifth Assessment Report, Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU), Chapter 11,available at
https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/02/ipcc_wg3_ar5_chapter11.pdf
105 Commercial logging requires a drastic reduction to almost zero in some European forests. Recently, the
Polish government was fined for logging an ancient forest. Volt supports this firmness against unsustainable
practices.
26


➢Improvement in protection and health of European waterways (only 40% of surface
water bodies surveyed by the European Environmental Agency (EEA) in 2018 were
found to be in a good ecological state).
➢Reform the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP)116 to increase the focus on
sustainable and environmental practices. The EAGF and EAFRD budgets (e.g., a
minimum of 50%) should be directed towards climate and environmental action,
and sustainable agriculture standards should be harmonised across Europe.
➢Adapt EU legislation to define goals and reliable evaluation methods, but not
dictate methods. EU farmers are best placed to reform their farming practises with
the help of expert knowledge and financial support. This way, creativity and
freedom to run their farming operations sustainably will be encouraged.
➢Further support research
& development117 into ways to build high-yield
eco-friendly agricultural systems that extract GHGs from the atmosphere and
deposit them into our soils, some of which have already been implemented on other
continents. The EU should offer support (financial or otherwise) and education to all
European farmers to implement these practices.
➢Encourage primary manufacturing industries to connect the supply chain together
with involved professionals to deliver low-carbon local species and products directly
to the market rather than relying on imports. There should be more infrastructure
and support given to farmers to access markets and consumers directly, instead of
relying on international commodity markets.118 By giving farmers more market
power, we can help them improve their livelihoods.
➢Improve water use in agriculture, with less reliance on irrigation and better
regulations taking ecosystem health into account (see earlier point on European
waterways).
➢Encourage more sustainable consumer habits, e.g., encouraging a plant-based diet,
promoting the circular economy (see next section), educating the public on how
their diet and other consumption affects the climate, encouraging shoppers to buy
seasonal produce and diversifying the ingredients they use, and having a balanced
118 See point 2 of http://www.fao.org/3/I9900EN/i9900en.pdf
117 See also
https://ec.europa.eu/info/news/european-commission-announces-eu1-billion-funding-more-sustainable
agriculture-food-and-rural-development_en
116 See also
https://ec.europa.eu/info/food-farming-fisheries/key-policies/common-agricultural-policy/future-cap_en
renewable energy transition? ”
27


diet.
➢Support farmers who need to change their agricultural practises because of climate
change
(climate
adaptation);
ensure
that
the
climate
transition
is
not
overwhelmingly detrimental; as weather patterns change, so too must the types of
crops used. Better prepare the agriculture sector for extreme weather events like
floods and droughts.
28


V. Carbon sinks / Carbon sequestering
A.Negative Emissions
To achieve our ambitious goal of limiting warming to 1.5 °C according to the Paris
Agreement, Volt supports the development and deployment of negative emission
technologies through an appropriate framework of legislation. We aim to develop a
portfolio of solutions, both natural and technological, that can be deployed according to
best practises and local conditions: Biomass-dependent approaches are best in areas that
have large amounts of biomass. In Europe Sweden is a prime example. Energy-intensive
approaches like DACCS profit from the availability of suitable storage and infrastructure.
Using decommissioned gas platforms is one proposal among many. Biochar is most
effective, where its application to the soil, its capacity to store water and reduce nitrate
leaching brings the best results. The following list is not conclusive but focuses on those
techniques most discussed at the moment. Volt also supports research and development
in other promising approaches like ocean-based CO2-removal or enhanced weathering.
B.Afforestation/Reforestation
Afforestation or reforestation are currently the cheapest and easiest ways to
generate negative emissions. Forests already capture 10% (155 million tons) of the
European greenhouse gas emissions and cover 35% of the European land surface.119
We plan to examine where further forest areas can be created, although it is difficult
due to the competition with other land uses and, as such, limited space. Therefore, we
plan to make the current forests healthier and more resilient with more biodiversity.
Volt aims for a higher percentage of natural forests and a transition to biodiverse mixed
forests in forestry. We promote the symbiosis of agriculture and forests in so-called
agroforests and support the development of a controllable definition and its integration
into agricultural funding. Deforestation, especially for infrastructure projects, must be
considered in terms of climate impact and combined with reforestation.
Another approach is the concept of urban forestry, or smart forest cities, where nature
becomes a part of the city through large parks, garden rooftops, and green facades.120 In
120 https://www.stefanoboeriarchitetti.net/en/project/smart-forest-city-cancun/
119 https://foresteurope.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/Summary_web.pdf
29


this context, we also support the development of other sources of biomass like
microalgae121 and kelp, which support the generation of negative emissions.
C.Biochar
The use of biochar as a carbon sink – PyCCS (Pyrogenic carbon capture and storage) –
enables smaller cities and communities without large industries to contribute to negative
emissions. The use of shrub cuttings from gardens and the application of biochar involves
citizens directly in the climate protection measures of their municipality. When used as a
soil conditioner, it results in additional carbon storage effects and additional yields for
agriculture, as well as producing renewable energy: a win-win-win situation. But quite
often, existing European (and national) laws and regulations stand in the way of its
widespread use. One important example is waste regulations: Legally, biochar is treated as
a by-product (waste) of bioenergy production, which in turn outlaws many of its possible
applications, especially in agriculture. We want to change this and build a legal
environment that supports the widespread use and research of biochar in further
applications122, and simultaneously sets clear requirements for quality.
Estimates of the global potential of biochar as a mitigation policy differ widely from
moderate to large and are highly dependent on the biomass sources considered. (For
example, if you integrate commercially cultivated seaweed like kelp – as already
proposed123 124– mitigation potential goes way up.) The IPCC attests, “Biochar could make a
significant
contribution
to
mitigating
both
land
degradation
and
climate
change,
simultaneously.”125
The most promising and economical use of biochar is cascade use, for example as animal
feed to be spread on the fields later as slurry. We want to build and promote carbon-based
agriculture as part of a comprehensive carbon economy.126 The award-winning "Stockholm
126 http://www.biochar-industry.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/Whitepaper_Biochar2020.pdf
125
https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/sites/4/2021/02/210202-IPCCJ7230-SRCCL-Complete-BOOK-HRES.
pdf; P.398
124Albert Bates, Kathleen Draper: Burn. Igniting a New Carbon Drawdown Economy to End the Climate Crisis.
London 2019
123 https://www.nature.com/articles/srep09665
122
https://cdrlaw.org/resources/biochar-status-under-international-law-and-regulatory-issues-for-the-practical-
application/;
121 Farrelly et al. Carbon sequestration and the role of biological carbon mitigation: A review
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2012.12.038
30


Biochar Project" is an international best practise and international pioneer.127 It has found
so many imitators in Europe and the USA that a guide for cities and municipalities has been
published.128
D.Bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS)
In models depicting pathways in compliance with the 1.5°-Goal, one of the most important
negative emission technologies is the combination of bioenergy with carbon capture and
storage (BECCS). The IPCC report on Land Use (2019) shows that if applied and restricted
to best practises, above climate mitigation additional benefits like support of farmers'
livelihoods are possible.129 However, due to the huge demand for land, relying on BECCS
alone and maximising this technology would threaten food security and biodiversity.
Volt aims to create pathways for the needed implementation of BECCS while at the same
time limiting the technology to best practises in light of regional conditions and the
Sustainable Development Goals of the UN. Following the recommendations of the British
Committee on Climate Change (CCC), we are committed to ensuring that in the future
large-scale biomass is only eligible for policy support and public funding if equipped with
CCS.130 We reject overreliance on this approach and see it as an important part of a
broader strategy that includes a suite of technologies. Best practises preferably rely on
biomass residues and organic waste (like biomethane from manure), but this doesn't
completely rule out the use of dedicated biomass, if combined with careful land-use and
sustainable agriculture. Best practice so far is Stockholm’s Combined Heat & Power
BECCS-Plant, operational since 2019, which burns only wood residues from Swedish
forestry and wood industry.
It is noteworthy that Bioenergy with Carbon Capture and Storage (BECCS) is also a source
of energy which, if used to replace fossil fuels, has additional mitigation potential above
and beyond the potential CO2-removal considered here. For this reason, biomass plays an
important role in energy-transition scenarios, whether combined with CCS or not. Volt is
committed to ensuring only sustainable agricultural and forestry practises are employed
and food security is not at risk, no matter how exactly biomass will be integrated into
future energy systems and the wider economy.
130
https://www.theccc.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/Biomass-in-a-low-carbon-economy-CCC-2018.pdf
129 https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/sites/4/2020/02/SPM_Updated-Jan20.pdf; P. 27
128 https://nordregio.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/Replicating-in-Stockholm-booklet-manual.pdf
127 https://goexplorer.org/stockholm-worlds-first-urban-carbon-sink-with-biochar/
31


E.Direct Air Carbon Capture & Storage (DACCS)
Volt sees Direct Air Carbon Capture and Storage (DACCS) as a key technology to ambitious
climate policy that limits warming to 1.5 degrees. While land-based approaches such as
afforestation, biochar or bioenergy+CCS (BECCS) can make an important contribution,
their feasibility is limited due to high land requirements. DACCS, on the other hand, as a
purely technical process without a significant land footprint, has no comparable
limitations and is therefore more environmentally friendly. Above that, models show that,
in the long run, DACCS is also cheaper due to better economies of scale. Not restrained by
land-use requirements, the technical potential of DACCS is nearly unlimited. For example,
a study from 2019 reports a potential of up to 155 GT/y by 2050 in the Maghreb region
alone (based on solar), outstripping any reasonable demand assumptions by an order of
magnitude.131 Other studies considering questions of scalability reach far smaller numbers,
especially for 2050, but even these studies assess potential by 2100 of up to 40 GT/y – still
twice the amount needed in the upper-end of estimates.132 Most recent research
highlights the importance of technological learning curves and the constraints on the
speed with which novel industries can scale.133 One important result is that, in the
long-term, carbon removal from DACCS profits greatly from early deployment (even
before the energy system is completely carbon free) to achieve technological maturity.
The one important drawback of DACCS is the high energy demand. However, it seems
possible that this demand can be reduced considerably – cut in half or even more – with
further technological progress134
135. Still, all estimates of future energy demand and
production are highly dependent on assumptions about how many negative emissions are
needed, which technologies will be employed, and how they will be integrated into our
energy systems. Identifying best practises is one of the major tasks of the coming decade,
and Volt is committed to supporting further development and deployment of DACCS. This
includes the building of a supportive legal framework. Laws hindering or outright
prohibiting geological storage of carbon, as they currently exist in some European
countries like Germany, have to end.
Direct Air Capture pilot plants have been successfully operated in Europe and the USA. In
Europe, there are plants in Iceland, Switzerland, and Italy. Best Practice is Iceland. The
carbon
extracted
from
the
air
is
geologically
stored,
where
it
135 https://news.mit.edu/2020/new-approach-to-carbon-capture-0709
134 https://www.energate-messenger.de/news/194903/mcc-beziffert-energiebedarf-fuer-klimaneutralitaet
(german)
133 https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-020-20437-0
132 https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/aabf9f/meta
131 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11027-019-9847-y
32


mineralizes—petrifies—quickly. After successful test operation of a small pilot since 2017,
the first large plant, "Orca", is currently being built with funding from the EU (Carbfix
Project). Starting in spring 2021, it will remove 4000 tonnes of CO2 permanently from the
atmosphere annually. Replication of the successful Carbfix project is currently being
prepared – again with funding from the EU – at three other locations in Turkey, Italy, and
Germany.
In order to cope with the high costs of entering the technology, we want to make it
mandatory for the fossil industry to remove an initially small fraction of the emissions
caused by their products (1-2%) from the air. This percentage may increase in the future,
as soon as technological maturity is achieved and costs start to sink.
33


VI. Adaptation Strategies
Even in the best scenario, limiting global warming to below 1.5 degrees, climatic
changes will be significant and will require communities to increase their adaptive
capacity. Strategies need to be developed in many areas to adapt to consequences such
as a rising sea level136, weather migration or disaster management, amongst others.
Volt will:137
➢Reinforce
flood
defences
of
vulnerable
European
coastal
areas
and
implement long-term coordinated adaptation plans within vulnerable European
regions.138
➢Create a European agency to control and coordinate the response to natural
disasters and mitigate their consequences through an EU-wide collaborative
approach.
➢Create a strategy for insurance underwriters139 and risk management to have
assessments over a minimum of 50 years of protection. Subsidies and a
compulsory fraction of capital reserves are to be ring-fenced for spending on
infrastructure that mitigates climate catastrophes.
➢Support legally binding treaties140 that fund planned migration as an
adaptation strategy. This can prevent conflicts, preserve lifestyles141, and givea
clear definition of “climate migration” in order to manage relocation.
➢Explore the possibility of applying circular economy principles as a
strategy for policy reform. The theory of circular economy can be distilled into
three core focus areas which can be applied to adaptation plans: design-out waste
and
pollution,
retain
materials
in-use
continually,
and
regenerate
natural
ecosystems.
141 To grasp the extent of the phenomenon, at: Femia, F. and Werrell, C. (eds.) (2013), The Arab Springand
Climate Change: A Climate and Security Correlations Series , USA, Center for American Progress.
140 Foresight (2011), Migration and Global Environmental Change: Future Challenges and Opportunities: Final
Project Report, London, The Government Office for Science.
139 C. Morana, G. Sbrana, 2019, “ Climate change implications for the catastrophe bonds market: An empirical
analysis ”, Economic Modelling
138 CarbonBrief, 2018, “ Coastal flooding in Europe ‘could cost up to €1 trillion per year’ by 2100 ”
137 https://www.vn.nl/cookie-wall?url_redirect=https://www.vn.nl/rising-sea-levels-netherlands/
136 https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2009/smsn/igo/054.pdf
34


VII. Politics, Budget, and Governance of
the Fair Transition
The transition to a carbon-neutral economic system is a colossal undertaking and will
redefine the EU’s industry, society, landscape, and even culture. Achieving this vision
quickly and effectively will require the EU to change its self-organisation and its
governance. Similarly, funding new green infrastructure, power generation, buildings, and
R&D capital investments will require investments of unprecedented scale.
Citizens are key actors in this transformation, and Volt encourages their strong
empowerment and participation. At the same time, even the best carbon regulation can
cause substantial redistribution of income and wealth amongst citizens, companies,
industries, and even states. While structural and sectoral changes are natural corollaries
of transformative progress, it is the responsibility of politicians to protect the weakest
and least adaptable members of society and create new opportunities.
But even if the EU succeeds with its most ambitious carbon reduction plans, these will cut
only 10% of global emissions. Strong diplomatic influence over extraterritorial emitters,
foreign countries, companies, and citizens is hence the EU’s instrument to solve this truly
global challenge.
A.‘United in diversity’: the role of the EU and Member
States
In the context of the energy transition, the role of the EU is to set (a) overall goals and (b)
conditions for deployments to ensure safety and equality for all Member States. In more
detail, the EU should:
➢Institute stimulus packages to achieve those goals.
➢Act as a high-level system integrator to ensure that the goals are achieved (e.g.,
European wide transmission systems for energy, quality requirements for supply,
European management and control systems).
➢Serve as the final arbiter on deployment conditions.
35


Under the “European Green Deal”, a package of measures has been provided to support
the energy transition until its completion. Further stimulus after such a milestone should
be provided by other means.
In this context, Member States still have a significant role in determining key decisions for
their energy transition pathways, together with the related financial costs. These decisions
should include:
➢Deciding on their own actual energy supply, including the involvement of industry;
➢Setting local conditions for deployment, in alignment with the European conditions
and system integration requirements;
➢Determining local decisions for energy distribution, management, and control
systems;
➢Ensuring full integration within the European framework.
B.Green Governance
There is enormous potential within European institutions to take the necessary actions to
prevent catastrophic damage while managing and monitoring the transition to a more
sustainable energy ecosystem. It is important to support the development of key
technologies while easing regulation and promoting new green initiatives. Furthermore,
we need intelligent policies and investments through a coordinated European Union,
supported by multidisciplinary and highly qualified professionals. Volt suggestions are,
therefore,
➢Create a multi-disciplinary European Climate Action and Energy Transition
Agency
(CAETA),
or
expand
the
competences
of
a
suitable
existing
organisation accordingly, which will coordinate a climate action partnership
network in close collaboration with all relevant Directorate Generals and
agencies. CAETA can manage the proposed funding142 for the energy transition
and climate action and will be in charge of identifying, developing, and supporting
regional and local sustainable projects.143 Furthermore, the agency will be in charge
of assessing knowledge and technological transfer programmes to developing
143 We would promote a collaboration with the EU Covenant of majors and encourage all EU towns to join
them and similar initiatives as it can engage local authorities in climate action .
142 Funds and Additional Financing Instruments
36


nations in close collaboration with the proposed Climate Diplomacy Group.
➢Check all new EU legislation for their climate impact and make compliance with
the EU’s reduction targets a requirement, similar to budget approval144. Existing
legislation will be reviewed and revised according to the same principles.
➢Increase
transparency
and
awareness
of
exported
and
imported
CO2e
emissions by yearly reporting and implementing “CO2e in trade reduction
targets” to reduce emissions globally.
➢Direct participatory budgets to citizens’ green initiatives aimed at reducing
our environmental impact at all levels of governance.
➢Create citizens’ assemblies at all governance levels to ensure that citizens’
demands for a fair energy transition are met.
➢Create a smart platform to link the energy transition planning from CAETA
with citizens, providing feedback regarding carbon footprint, sustainable options
to encourage behavioural change145, and crowdfunding and participatory budgets
for a sustainable accelerator platform.
➢Empower citizens by improving publicly available information for more
conscious energy consumption. Volt will increase climate change knowledge and
awareness by including climate change information in public communication
channels and at all education levels146; by mandating and improving cradle-to-grave
carbon footprint declarations on products and services, starting with unambiguous
carbon footprints coming from travel and fuel; and by promoting education and
awareness-raising initiatives on environmentally friendly travel.
C.Funding and social transition
With the right regulatory framework, private banks will likely cover the lion’s share of the
multi-trillion-euro green investments. Yet, public funding will, in some cases, likely be
needed as a complement. Low-income demographics are likely to get hit hardest by green
regulations like the introduction of a carbon price, the redirection of subsidies, and new
146 R. Baud, 2013, “Education and Outreach” in “Handbook of Sustainable Engineering” by R. Baudetal,
Springer Netherlands
145 Feedback and consumption advice could produce 20% of electricity savings. R. Baud, 2013, “Policy and
Decision Making” in “Handbook of Sustainable Engineering” by R. Baud et al, Springer Netherlands
144 Some legislation will inevitably cause higher emissions; this rule must hence apply at
an aggregate level, e.g. DG
37


restrictions for carbon emitters. Volt wants to alleviate undue social distortions, and
prevent the rise of populist parties by proposing the following:
➢Stop all subsidies for all fossil fuels as they function as a negative cost on carbon
and currently amount to €40-200 billion per year147. Redirect those subsidies to
compensate citizens for higher costs and fund the EU’s green transition.
➢Raising
funds
to
support
the
energy
transition
through
the
European
Investment Bank and other public investment banks within the EU, with the
support of the European Central Bank. Furthermore, any new European stimulus
package must contain at least 50% of green spending.148
➢Use the proceeds from CO2 pricing for three purposes:
○
Direct cash payments to citizens (‘carbon dividends’) to compensate for
higher consumer price levels resulting from the expanded carbon pricing.
This is a widely recommended model149 and successful best practise in
Switzerland and Canada. 150
○
Subsidies for green products and investments151 to change individual
behaviour and steer the green transformation at the individual level
while also benefiting citizens monetarily to offset price increases, and
○
Direct state investments in green R&D and infrastructure such as future
energy technologies or pan-european power grids (on top of regular
budget).
All proceeds should be spent in the country they originate from in order to avoid
unintended financial re-distributions across EU countries.
The total annual budget is expected to be around €200 billion (order of magnitude)
- a significant amount (1 - 1.5% of GDP). The Member States will decide which green
products to subsidise and which R&D projects to fund.
The proceeds should be divided evenly in a balanced mix with 33% for carbon
divvied, 33% for green product subsidies, and 33% for state investments for green
R&D + infrastructure.
151 Like cheaper public transport, buying incentives for electric cars, lower VAT for non-meat food,subsidies
for building insulation (Swiss best practice)
150 https://www.oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk/news/201807-carbon-pricing/
149 https://clcouncil.org/economists-statement/
148 Bowen, Alex, Nick Stern, Sam Fankhauser and Dimitri Zenghelis, 2019, “An Outline of the Case for a Green
Stimulus”. London, Grantham Institute
147 European Parliament, Directorate General for Internal Policies, Policy Department,
Economic and Scientific Policy, Analysis on Fossil Fuel Subsidies, available at
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/IDAN/2017/595372/IPOL_IDA(2017)595372_EN.pdf
38


➢Use tax revenue and cost savings collected from the former fossil fuel
subsidies to directly fund relevant climate mitigation and adaptation projects,
including social adaptation like retraining (see below).
➢Ensure that at least 50% of the EU expenditure contributes to the climate
objectives to strengthen action in key areas and through direct climate action152
and for climate mainstreaming across all EU programmes.
➢Increase spending on climate-action related research and development and on
the EU-wide energy and transport cross-border infrastructure through the
innovation fund and the NEW 300 programme, the fossil-fuels subsidy phase out,
and with the support of the EU budget and European financial institutions.
➢Create programmes for the re-training and re-employment of workers from the
fossil fuel industries; create re-employment programmes oriented towards other
professions; and promote the creation of subsidised professional training courses.
➢Enable easier balancing of the interests of individual citizens and society
overall when it comes to infrastructure built near residences in order to
overcome resistance and accelerate the transition. E.g., enabling and supporting
citizens’ participation in infrastructure investments, either individually or as a
municipality.
➢Incentivise institutional investors and the financial sector to shift resources
away
from
fossil
fuels
towards
climate-friendly
solutions153.
All
public
administrations, banks, pension funds, etc., need to take their funds out of fossil
fuels.
➢Support research, training, and capacity-building programmes for investors and
business professionals to encourage corporate social responsibility together with
effective and efficient financing for the climate revolution. Support the creation of
such training schemes for responsible public and private financing.
D.Climate Diplomacy
About 90% of the world’s emissions happen outside the EU; 15% come from tropical
deforestation alone. It is therefore not enough to only cut emissions in Europe—the EU
153 Such as shifting towards a low-carbon economy, climate risk resilience, and environmental expertise on
corporate boards.
152 Currently, the EU has a target of 25% of the Multiannual Financial Framework for 2021-2017 .
39


should leverage its soft power as a trade powerhouse to foster global carbon neutrality
through excellent diplomacy, green trade agreements, tropical reforestation, green
development cooperation, global adoption of carbon pricing, a geoengineering treaty, and
a geoengineering framework154. This requires making climate protection a top foreign
policy goal. A relatively small investment in diplomatic excellence can have a decisive
impact in solving this climate crisis.
➢Create a joint dedicated Climate Diplomacy Group by the EU’s Common Foreign
and Security Policy (CFSP) and the Directorate-General for Climate Action (DG
CLIMA) to amp up the EU’s climate diplomatic efforts and support other DGs.
➢Use trade agreements as a tool to advance environmental protection and climate
action abroad155 by making them contingent on compliance with the Paris
Agreement and other environmental and emission standards.156 Volt specifically
opposes trade agreements with countries contributing to serious environmental
damage, and sees trade agreements as a way to induce stricter climate action
worldwide.
➢Drive the protection and restoration of tropical rainforests and other carbon
sinks through monitoring, regulation, and investment. This can include bans on
damaging products like non-sustainable tropical wood or palm oil from former
rainforest areas and using the full arsenal of international diplomacy, such as
imposing sanctions for environmental abuses.157
➢Centre development cooperation around climate protection through transfer of
technology, know-how, and best practises to enable the leapfrogging of developing
countries to decarbonized economies. Aid to developing nations should adhere to
the UN’s sustainable development goals158. This would mean, for example,
supporting low-carbon development159. For some examples see 160 and the UN
sustainable development partnership with Ghana.161
161 https://ghana.un.org/en/10146-united-nations-sustainable-development-framework
160
http://www.climatenetwork.org/sites/default/files/exploring_sustainable_low_carbon_development_path
ways_overall_concept_1.pdf
159 http://www.climatenetwork.org/sites/default/files/151127_can_cop21_report_rz-screen_es.pdf
158 https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainable-development-goals/
157
https://opencommons.uconn.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?referer=&httpsredir=1&article=1322&context=law_pa
pers
156 Such as with the USA with Trump’s recent announcement to withdraw from the Paris Agreement, as this
would harm climate action worldwide .
155 Kateryna Holzera and Thomas Cottier, “Addressing climate change under preferential trade agreements:
Towards alignment of carbon standards under the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership” , 2015
154 www.geoengineering.ox.ac.uk/what-is-geoengineering/what-is-geoengineering/
40


➢Working towards expanded adoption as well as the harmonisation of carbon
pricing schemes globally, with the objective of a single global carbon pricing
framework
➢Encourage the creation of an international panel on geoengineering under the
auspices of the United Nations to prevent its potentially dangerous and
unethical deployment. This should happen in close and transparent cooperation
with the IPCC, leading geoengineering experts, and national governments162, and
the Oxford Principles on Geoengineering should be followed163. These technologies
shall not be part of a transition strategy but only a last resort, and must be agreed
on an international level. The focus of this panel should be on potentially
dangerous forms of geoengineering like solar radiation management; in contrast,
greenhouse gas removal through CCS164 and reforestation is actually encouraged
and hence not in focus.
➢Recognize ecocide through an amendment to the Rome treaty and push the
international community to follow. Push for the creation of an international
environmental court, within the EU and UN, to make ecocide completely universal165
and extend it to regions of armed conflicts for biodiversity protection through a 5th
Geneva Convention.166 167
167 Brito, J. C. et al. 2019, “ Armed conflicts and wildlife decline: Challenges and recommendations for
effective conservation policy in the Sahara-Sahel ”, Society for Conservation Biology.
166 Durant, S. M., Brito, J. C., 2019, “ Stop military conflicts from trashing the environment ”, Nature
165 Ecocide can be present when a company decides to invest in fossil fuel energies for a long term strategy,
or when a politician acts to oppose environmental regulations without alternatives which would decrease
pollution and GHG emissions. “On an international recognition of the crime of ecocide: For a binding
international environmental law architecture” , 5th EGP Congress, Liverpool, 30 March - 2 April 2017
164 Carbon Capture and Storage
163 The Oxford Principles
162 Volt document on Geoengineering
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1IhGfwx4HNcDEkyqoHpMOuqw_TnuyfHQbMD8jgCzPlBA/edit#headi
ng=h.rpbcq6fy1o34
41


