Volt Deutschland | Choriner Str. 34 | 10435 Berlin
Englisch
How to: vote for the EU election in germany as non-german EU citizen
How to vote
To vote in the European elections in Germany as an EU citizen, you need to follow a few
steps.
Here's a simple guide in eight steps:
1) Check the requirements
You must be a citizen of an EU country and have been registered in Germany for at least
three months. Also, you must be at least 16 years old by June 9, 2024, to be eligible to
vote.
2) Register
You need to enrol in the voter registry for the European elections. This is important
because your registration does not happen automatically. To do this, you have to submit
an application to your municipal administration. We have linked the application form for
you here.
3) Fill out the form
Unfortunately, the form is only available in German (and yes, we are just as frustrated as
you are about it). Therefore, we have translated for you what needs to be entered in the
form.
4) Send the form
You must send the completed form in its original form to your municipal authority. You can
easily find this on the internet with the words "Eintragung ins Wählerverzeichnis" and the
name of your city. For example: "Eintragung ins Wählerverzeichnis Köln." You can either
bring the form in person or send it by mail. If you prefer to send the form by mail, we have
written a template for the cover letter for you here:
Volt Deutschland I Seite 1


Volt Deutschland | Choriner Str. 34 | 10435 Berlin
Englisch
How to: vote for the EU election in germany as non-german EU citizen
Attention! Replace your name, date of birth, and address. After "Mit freundlichen Grüßen,"
you must personally sign.
Guten Tag,
mein Name ist “Marie Mustermann”, geboren am 1.1.2000 und wohne in der
Max-Str.12, 10115 Berlin. Hiermit möchte ich mich in das Wählerverzeichnis
eintragen lassen. Das ausgefüllte Formular finden Sie anbei.
Mit freundlichen Grüßen
__M. Mustermann_
Marie Mustermann
5) Note the deadlines
The registration form must reach your municipality no later than May 19, 2024. Therefore,
send the letter a few days before or go to the office in person.
6) Prepare for the election
If you are registered in the voter registry, you will receive a letter from your competent
authority by May 19. This letter contains all the information you need for the election. For
example, how to apply for postal voting, or where the polling station is located where you
can personally cast your vote on election day.
7) Go to the election
On election day, go to your assigned polling station. There, you will be asked to present
your ID card or passport to confirm your identity.
8) Vote
Make your mark for the party you believe should be the best representatives in the
European Parliament. What Volt, for example, stands for can be found here.
Done!
Congratulations! You have successfully participated in the European elections in Germany.
If you have any further questions about the process, feel free to contact us by email:
info@voltdeutschland.org - and stay informed through our newsletter.
Volt Deutschland I Seite 2
