 
 
 
 
​
​
Integrity Syllabus 
Volt Europa A.I.S.B.L. 
[As updated on 23.11.2025]​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
Preface 
This Integrity Syllabus is part of the integrity system of Volt Europa A.I.S.B.L. (hereafter: 
Volt Europa), as set out in the Internal Regulations. 
 
An integrity system and the accompanying codes, procedures and mandates are dynamic 
and subject to change throughout time. Constant efforts and conversations among the 
members of Volt Europa lay the groundwork to continuously develop the integrity system.  
 
Integrity is not only a responsibility of individual members and representatives of Volt 
Europa in political and administrative organs, but also a common endeavour which affects 
all organisations, on all levels. This Integrity Syllabus therefore affects all members, 
representatives, teams and organs of Volt Europa.  
 
Integrity is not only made out of rules and regulations and is more so about the way in 
which we behave, interact and treat each other. These manners and the way in which 
representatives of Volt Europa behave outside of the organisation influence the culture of 
the movement. Integrity is also about values and principles, which co-determine the 
culture. A safe environment within Volt Europa is important. It allows members to speak up 
and be themselves. 
 
This syllabus acts as supplementary to laws, regulations and general standards of human 
behaviour. The syllabus provides an assessment framework and acts as a guide in case of 
uncertainty, questions and discussions.  
 
Integrity is a subject that takes on meaning through the behaviour of individuals. An 
integrity policy only on paper, is a document without meaning. This syllabus is an 
instrument that can be used to optimise all the conditions and circumstances for 
upstanding behaviour, though integrity cannot be fully captured in rules. In the words of 
author C.S. Lewis "integrity is doing the right thing, even when no one is watching."  
 
 
 
 
1 


 
 
Table of Contents 
Preface​
1 
Table of Contents​
2 
1. Practicalities and basics​
3 
1.1. Introduction​
3 
1.2. Values and Principles​
3 
1.3. Purpose of this Syllabus​
3 
1.4. Application of this Syllabus​
4 
1.5. Individual behaviour and the culture of Volt Europa​
4 
2. European Code of Conduct (ECC)​
5 
2.1. Interpersonal behaviour, online and in person​
5 
2.2. Communication & Public Relations​
7 
2.3. Financial matters​
8 
2.4. Use of power​
9 
2.5. Officials’ Code of Conduct​
10 
2.6.A. Declaration of Financial Interests​
11 
2.6.B. Transparency Register​
12 
2.7. Glossary terms and definitions​
12 
3. Integrity entities​
16 
3.1. Integrity Commission​
19 
3.2. Counsellor’s Office​
23 
3.3. Mediation Team​
25 
3.4. Integrity interaction models, Reports / Complaints Model​
28 
4. Whistleblower Protection and Reporting​
30 
4.1. Purpose​
30 
4.2. Scope​
30 
4.3. Who Can Report​
30 
4.4. Reporting Channels​
30 
4.5. Protection Against Retaliation​
30 
4.6. Confidentiality​
31 
 
 
 
2 


 
 
1. Practicalities and basics 
1.1. Introduction 
Members of Volt Europa are expected to act with honesty, integrity, and good faith. This 
document outlines the framework for an integrity system, but it is important to remember 
that each individual has their own moral compass. Every member should be mindful of their 
actions, words, and writing or in other means in which it expresses itself. 
 
When in doubt about their behaviour, members can reflect on the following questions: 
●​ Does what I do, say, or write align with the values, culture, and policies of Volt 
Europa? 
●​ Is it legal? 
●​ Does it feel right? 
●​ Could it harm me, other members, or Volt Europa as a whole? 
●​ Who else might be affected (Volt employees, people outside Volt Europa) 
●​ If my intended action creates an ethical conflict, is there an alternative that respects 
integrity? 
●​ How would it appear in the press or on social media? 
 
1.2. Values and Principles 
Volt Europa is a political association grounded in shared moral values and principles. The 
culture of Volt Europa is shaped by these values, alongside the collective behaviour of its 
members. 
 
Members are encouraged to engage in ongoing, constructive dialogue about the 
association’s values and principles. The core values and principles outlined in Article 3 of 
the Statutes provide the foundation for these discussions. As additional values are 
identified, they will be incorporated into this syllabus, further defining the culture of Volt 
Europa. 
 
In line with these values, members of Volt Europa should aim to: 
●​ Lead by example in fostering a united, federal Europe. 
●​ Promote a future built on high standards in human rights, climate, sustainability, 
society, and technology, where everyone has equal opportunities to grow as 
individuals and contribute to shared goals. 
●​ Support proper public governance at the European, national, regional, and local 
levels. 
 
Integrity is a personal trait of an individual. An ethical person is intrinsically sincere and 
reliable, has no hidden agenda and does not feign emotions. An ethical person takes 
responsibility for their own actions, is approachable and addresses the behaviour of others. 
The integrity of Volt Europa is defined by the sum of the behaviour of all members and 
organs of the party. 
 
1.3. Purpose of this Syllabus 
The purpose of this syllabus is to: 
 
3 


 
 
●​ Promote integrity, including the appropriate handling of actual or potential 
conflicts of interest in both personal and professional relationships. 
●​ Promote compliance with applicable laws, regulations, rules, and administrative 
practices relevant to Volt Europa's activities. 
●​ Foster a culture of honesty, accountability, and transparency. 
●​ Create a safe environment where members and employees can raise concerns and 
cooperate fully in investigations without fear of retaliation. 
●​ Provide clear guidelines and procedures for recognizing, preventing, addressing, 
and reporting unethical behaviour. To this extent, section §2.7 provides a glossary 
with key terms related to unethical behaviour and the understanding thereof for 
the benefit and guidance of our members and integrity bodies.  
 
1.4. Application of this Syllabus 
This syllabus applies to all members of Volt Europa. Volt Officials and those in political or 
executive roles on behalf of Volt Europa hold a special responsibility to uphold and 
exemplify its principles. 
 
It also serves as a guideline for third parties and organisations associated with Volt Europa. 
 
1.5. Individual behaviour and the culture of Volt Europa 
The collective behaviour of all members shapes the culture of Volt Europa. Members – 
whether acting individually, in teams, or as part of executive or administrative bodies – are 
expected to align their actions with applicable laws, regulations, and Volt Europa’s values, 
principles, and codes of conduct. 
 
An ethical individual is autonomous, honest, and authentic, standing for a cause and being 
loyal to its values and principles. For Volt Europa, this means that members will want to act 
in harmony with Volt Europa's values, principles, and ideals. 
 
An ethical member of Volt Europa naturally incorporates these values into their life, 
remains sensitive to societal issues that Volt addresses, and is accountable for their own 
actions. 
 
 
4 


 
 
2. European Code of Conduct (ECC) 
This chapter outlines concrete and practical guidelines for members to do so. Members 
may be reported to the appropriate bodies in Chapter 3 of this Integrity Syllabus for 
(continuous) non-compliance. The Code of Conduct is a guideline based on values and 
principles which promote upstanding behaviour. 
 
2.1. Interpersonal behaviour, online and in person 
2.1.1. 
We withhold ourselves from any form of aggressive behaviour towards others, or groups in 
society at large, by refraining from behaviour such as, insulting, mocking, using derogatory 
terms, defaming, shouting, stereotyping, threatening, generalising, denigrating, and 
disrespect. Members also commit to fostering an inclusive environment by recognising and 
addressing microaggressions and unintentional biases, and refrain from spreading 
unproven statements brought as facts. Accusations are not made without going through 
the proper channels first, as outlined in chapter 3 of this Syllabus.  
 
2.1.2.  
We commit to proactive inclusivity. We will treat all others equally, with respect, empathy, 
and dignity, regardless of personal attributes. We are especially respectful considering 
others’ characteristics, such as, but not limited to, race, skin colour, language, religion or 
spiritual beliefs, nationality or national or ethnic origin, descent, age, (dis)ability, gender 
identity and sex, sexual orientation, level of education, and socioeconomic status. We 
accept that every person is unique. Diversity in personal characteristics brings great value 
to our movement and is recognised as such. Discrimination of any kind on the basis of these 
personal attributes is strictly prohibited. Hostility and prejudice involving, but not limited 
to, racism, antisemitism, islamophobia, ableism, homophobia, and transphobia, is strictly 
prohibited. We also recognise intersectionality in all its forms, meaning that individuals 
may have their own unique experiences of discrimination based on one or several of the 
attributes listed above. We maintain a culture of mutual respect and constructive criticism 
so long as the rules set out in this document are respected.  
 
2.1.3. 
We will not engage in any form of unwanted sexual intimacy, nor shall they engage in 
sexual intimidation and sexual violence in their actions, verbally, written or in any other 
way. Silence or lack of resistance does not constitute consent. 
 
2.1.4. 
When preparing agendas, topics, and discussion points, we ensure that all spaces - physical 
and digital - foster a sense of psychological safety and inclusion. Our goal is for every 
member, especially those from vulnerable or underrepresented groups, to feel 
comfortable and emotionally at ease to participate fully. 
 
2.1.5. 
When organising events, both online and offline, we should commit to finding accessible 
venues that allow participation on equal terms, to the best of their abilities. Accessibility 
provisions should be considered, such as wheelchair accessibility, sufficient seating, 
 
5 


 
 
sensitivity to light and noise, sufficient low-crowded space, and accessibility to live 
captions, audio-description, sign language interpretation, and childcare. If a member has 
difficulty following discussions due to a cognitive, hearing or other disability, they can 
request pauses for clarification or written summaries when needed. We further commit to 
inquiring beforehand if participants need any specific accommodations not outlined in this 
section, and to communicate as far in advance as possible, in a clear and transparent 
manner, both on the planned accessibility provisions and on any lack of them.  
 
2.1.6. 
We never ignore or act negligently in case of breaches of any of the guidelines offered in 
this chapter and will always seek the most effective resolution, while guaranteeing 
protection to victims. We have the duty to prevent, de-escalate and try to solve all 
occurring conflicts within the movement with politeness and respectfulness.  
 
2.1.7. 
When disagreement of opinion arises, and/or when a member’s contributions are 
experienced as offensive, and we personally wish for this to change for ourselves or for 
others, we try to explain why, in a clear and calm manner. If this is too difficult, we ask 
other members to help. We own up to our mistakes and offer apologies when we are made 
aware of (unintentional) harm to others, ideally paired with explanations of our own 
perceptions. Conversation is key to resolving tensions and fostering a collaborative and 
constructive environment. Conflicting parties should first look to contact each other, 
preferably face to face, and try to resolve the conflict themselves. If direct resolution is not 
possible, or if members do not feel equipped to address the conflict, members should seek 
mediation through the Volt Europa Integrity Bodies. The goal should always be not to 
escalate the conflict and resolve it as soon as possible. We give each other multiple chances 
and strive to not base our opinions of others on a single, isolated and minor incident.  
 
2.1.8. 
We commit to using the digital community platforms in a positive way, based on the 
principles laid out in this code of conduct. The digital platforms serve as a space for 
democratic engagement, transparent communication, and constructive discussions. 
Members should avoid spreading misinformation. Digital interactions should reflect the 
same respectful and inclusive principles as in-person communication. We commit to 
following the rules set by Volt Europa for the maintenance and moderation of the Volt 
Europa communication platforms.  
 
2.1.9. 
We shall respect the private life of all persons, and especially of other members. This 
includes maintaining confidentiality in private conversations, refraining from sharing 
personal 
information 
without 
consent, 
and ensuring digital privacy in online 
communications. Confidential matters remain confidential and we may only get access to 
confidential information after signing a Non-Disclosure Agreement (NDA).  
 
 
6 


 
 
2.1.10. 
We are expected not to partake in illegal activities. If activities are in line with Volt Europa’s 
values, but are considered illegal in a country, we may only participate upon explicit 
consent from the Volt Europa Board.  
 
2.2. Communication & Public Relations 
2.2.1. 
We ensure that any communication made in the name of Volt Europa aligns with the 
association’s values, principles, and policies, reflecting professionalism and respect in all 
forms of public outreach. 
 
2.2.2. 
We may only communicate on behalf of the association if explicitly authorised to do so, and 
this communication should align with Volt’s policies and political programme. Those not 
explicitly authorised to communicate on behalf of the association must clarify in their 
communication that their opinions are personal and do not represent Volt Europa. 
 
2.2.3. 
We are responsible for what they say, write, or share publicly, including in (social) media, 
and should avoid communicating anonymously. Their communication should be respectful 
at all times, regardless of whether they communicate on behalf of Volt Europa or not.  
 
2.2.4. 
We shall refrain from sharing false or misleading information in any communication, 
whether on behalf of Volt Europa, its Member Associations or personally.  
 
2.2.5. 
All public communications on behalf of Volt should be fact-checked to ensure credibility 
and accuracy. 
 
2.2.6. 
We are encouraged to remember that when we wear the Volt logo on merchandising, we 
are ambassadors for our organisation, and are encouraged to behave in ways that are in 
concordance with what is described in this document and those referenced in the 
preamble. 
 
2.2.7. 
Volt Europa’s logo may not be used in any way that falsely implies a connection to or 
endorsement by Volt Europa. It must not be used in contexts that are incompatible with 
Volt’s values, principles, or legal standards and must not be associated with illegal activities 
or misleading communications.  
 
2.2.8. 
We who are not authorised spokespeople should direct formal media inquiries to 
designated communication officers or leadership, and avoid providing unofficial comments, 
unless we appear explicitly as members and not representatives.  
 
7 


 
 
 
2.2.9. 
We respect Volt Europa’s promotion of honesty and transparency. Honesty is essential for 
maintaining the trust of party members and the broader public. We must be truthful and 
transparent in their communications with others.  
 
2.2.10. 
We as individual members may create, use, or share any image, video, audio recording, or 
other content featuring another person only with the consent of the person or the rights 
holder. 
 
2.2.11. 
We want everyone to be able to participate fully, including people with disabilities, 
different language skills, or different ways of processing information. To make our 
communication easy to understand and as accessible as possible, we: 
●​ Use clear and simple language and aim to include subtitles for videos and 
alternative text for images in key communications;  
●​ Seek guidance to improve the accessibility to our communication; 
●​ Are transparent in steps taken to ensure accessible communication, welcome 
constructive feedback, and are willing to reflect on areas of improvement.  
●​ Avoid jargon and overly technical language unless it is necessary, and explain terms 
clearly when we use them. In discussions, we allow sufficient time for people to 
respond, recognising that individuals process information in different ways and at 
different speeds. 
●​ Commit to inclusive language that respects diverse identities and lived experiences, 
and we design and format content in a way that works well with screen readers and 
is accessible to people with dyslexia.  
 
2.3. Financial matters 
2.3.1. 
We ensure the proper use of Volt Europa's financial resources and facilities and refrain 
from misusing them for personal or other unauthorised purposes. In particular, we shall 
withhold ourselves from using public resources, funds, or facilities for campaign purposes, 
unless such resources, funds, or facilities are explicitly designated for such purposes. 
Unnecessary expenses shall be avoided and those expenses for representation or 
attendance at meetings or other events including meals and lodging, shall be duly justified, 
under the principle of appropriateness, proportionality, and necessity.  
 
2.3.2. 
We ensure that our financial practices align with the values and goals of the association 
and refrain from any financial misconduct and unethical financial practices.  
 
2.3.3. 
We are transparent to internal or external auditors and are strictly prohibited from directly 
or indirectly taking any action to coerce, manipulate, mislead, or fraudulently influence 
internal or external auditors involved in preparing Volt Europa’s financial statements. 
 
8 


 
 
 
2.3.4. 
In line with our roles and responsibilities within the association, we aim to produce 
complete, fair, accurate, accessible, readable, timely, and transparent reports and 
documents of the finances of the organisation, for regulatory agencies and in public 
communications, to the best of their abilities. 
 
2.4. Use of power 
2.4.1. 
We refrain from abusing our positions and privileges and do not offer monetary or other 
advantages to others, for personal or political gain for themselves or their close associates, 
whether through offering rewards, threatening sanctions, or other forms of coercion. 
These positions of power, privilege, or influence can be familial, friendly, professional, 
governmental, political, or of any other nature. 
 
2.4.2. 
Members confronted with abuse of power are expected to resist it. This may involve 
declining offered advantages, addressing the abuse with the person or organisation 
involved, reporting it to the appropriate body (see chapter 3), and/or taking other 
reasonable actions to uphold integrity based on the nature of the abuse. 
 
2.4.3. 
A conflict of interest arises when an individual’s (direct or indirect) personal, financial, 
professional, or political interests, or those of their close associates, could reasonably be 
perceived to compromise their ability to act in the best interests of the movement. This 
includes, but is not limited to, financial, professional, political, and personal conflicts.  
 
2.4.4. 
In dealing with conflicts of interest, transparency and accountability are key values that 
Volt Europa and its members aim to adhere to. If an actual, potential or perceived conflict 
of interest exists, the person(s) involved shall do the following:  
●​ Anyone dealing with (an actual or a potential) conflicts of interest can request 
confidential advice from the European Ombudspersons. 
●​ They should report their conflicts of interest in a timely manner to the relevant 
body (e.g. their team leads). In case of a Volt Official, this would include the national 
board and the European Officials’ Office.  
●​ Upon disclosure of an actual or potential conflict of interest, the individual must 
withdraw from discussions, decision-making or votes that relate to the matter in 
question, unless it has been decided that, considering the materiality of the conflict, 
the individual may participate. If they withdraw, it must be mentioned that the 
reason for withdrawal is a conflict of interest. 
●​ If someone suspects that a fellow member has a conflict of interest and has not 
taken the appropriate steps to address it, this can be reported to the 
Ombudspersons to determine appropriate actions.  
 
 
9 


 
 
2.5. Officials’ Code of Conduct 
2.5.1. Introduction 
1.​ This Officials’ Code of Conduct provides additional rules for Volt Officials (see 
definition in §2.7) as long as it does not conflict with the rules set by the body on 
which they are elected or appointed.  
2.​ Volt Officials, starting with their next mandate after the applicability of this Code of 
Conduct, are not allowed to 
a.​ be a member of another political party than Volt; 
b.​ combine an appointed or elected public position with another appointed or 
elected public position. Dispensation can be granted by the European 
Officials’ Office (“EOO”) (who will liaise with the responsible board). 
3.​ Volt Officials can only be a member of a Board or a Committee within Volt when 
they adhere to Article 10.5 of the Collaboration Regulations regarding 
incompatibility with other roles.  
 
2.5.2. Values and guiding principles of a Volt Official 
1.​ In some instances, a Volt Official is expected to be politically neutral. In that case, 
some of the below-mentioned values and guiding principles cannot apply. Before 
entering into a position that may limit their capacity to appear as representing Volt, 
Volt Officials are therefore to consult with the EOO.  
2.​ In all other cases, Volt Officials are expected to 
a.​ uphold Volt’s values and principles and protect its reputation; 
b.​ publically support and speak about Volt, and identify as being from Volt; 
c.​ act in the interest of the citizens of their constituency; 
d.​ create connections between citizens of their constituency and Volt;  
e.​ collaborate, through shared actions, within and outside Volt and within and 
outside the borders of their constituency; 
f.​ uphold Volt’s distinctiveness through evidence-based policymaking and 
long-term vision; 
g.​ not engage in vote trading, unless a political initiative clearly aligns with 
Volt’s values; 
h.​ apply common sense;  
i.​
not accept nepotism in their work; 
j.​
be tough on content, gentle on the person in their interactions. 
 
2.5.3. Coalitions 
1.​ Cooperation to pursue Volt’s values should be balanced against the need to 
maintain Volt’s integrity and identity. Therefore, Volt Officials are expected to  
a.​ Consult with the EOO before entering into a Coalition (see definition in §2.7) 
and adhere to Article 17 of the Collaboration Regulations; 
b.​ Only form Coalitions with political parties with similar values as Volt. 
2.​ Volt Officials are expected to leave a coalition when one or multiple coalition 
partners no longer have similar values as Volt. 
 
2.5.4. Financial conduct  
1.​ Volt has a zero-tolerance policy on any form of fraud, bribery and corrupt behaviour. 
This entails that a Volt Official must refrain from accepting, in the performance of 
 
10 


 
 
their duties, any gifts or similar benefits, worth more than €50. Even if regulations 
or laws within the public authority allow for a higher value, the Volt limit of €50 
applies. 
2.​ The above provision does not apply to the reimbursement of travel, 
accommodation, and subsistence expenses when Volt Officials, in the performance 
of their duties, attend an event organised by third parties. 
 
2.5.5. Contribution 
Volt Officials are expected, to the extent legally allowed, to contribute a percentage of the 
fixed remuneration received for their mandate to Volt at the European and/or 
(sub)national level, corresponding to the level at which they hold their mandate. 
Remuneration amounts up to €500 per month may be exempt from this contribution. 
 
2.5.6. Transparency  
Volt Officials are expected to  
1.​ submit a Declaration of Financial Interests (see §2.6.A) to the EOO within 120 days 
of taking office, to be resubmitted on an annual basis. Any changes that influence 
the declaration must be notified to the EOO within 120 days of such changes 
occurring; 
2.​ maintain a Transparency Register (see §2.6.B) to inform the public about which 
events Volt Officials attend and which organisations and initiatives Volt Officials 
meet in the performance of their duties. The register shall be shared with the EOO 
and must be updated at least annually to demonstrate commitment to ethical 
governance and transparency, minimising the risk of corruption. 
 
2.6.A. Declaration of Financial Interests 
As Volt Official, please complete the following information within 120 days of taking 
office, and resubmit on an annual basis: 
 
1.​ Any regular remunerated activity alongside the exercise of your office, whether as 
an employee or as a self-employed person. 
2.​ Any occasional remunerated activity alongside the exercise of your office (including 
writing, lecturing or the provision of expert advice), if the total remuneration 
exceeds €5,000 in a calendar year. 
3.​ Any other relevant activity alongside the exercise of your office, whether the 
activity in question is remunerated or unremunerated. 
4.​ Any membership of boards or committees of companies, non-governmental 
organisations, associations or other bodies established in law. 
5.​ Any holding in a company or partnership with potential public policy implications. 
6.​ Any other financial interests which might influence the performance of your duties. 
7.​ Any salary you received in the past for the exercise of a mandate in another public 
authority. 
8.​ Any regular remunerated activity, whether as an employee or as a self-employed 
person, during the three-year period before you took up office. 
9.​ Any membership of boards or committees of companies, non-governmental 
organisations, associations or other bodies established in law during the three-year 
period before you took up office. 
 
11 


 
 
 
2.6.B. Transparency Register 
Volt Officials are expected to use the following template to keep track of their meetings 
with external parties.  
 
Date 
Meeting 
Contact(s) 
Location 
Topic 
Purpose 
Volt 
Official(s) 
[DD-MM-YYY
Y] 
[NAME OF 
MEETING] 
[NAME(S) OF 
PERSON(S) 
MET] 
[LOCATION] 
[TOPIC] 
[PURPOSE] 
[NAME(S) OF 
VOLT 
OFFICIAL(S) 
ATTENDING] 
Add new 
row for 
each entry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.7. Glossary terms and definitions  
Accessibility: Accessibility includes all measures taken to enable disabled people to 
participate fully in all aspects of life, by ensuring access on an equal basis with others to 
the physical or digital environment, transport, information, communication, etc..  
 
Antisemitism: We follow the definition as most recently approved by the General 
Assembly. However, recognising that any definition will have its limitations, we see this 
definition as a "working definition" helping the Integrity bodies to identify potentially 
antisemitic narratives, rather than a tool that tells them what should be sanctioned and 
what not. 
 
On 23 November 2025, the General Assembly of Volt Europa resolved to adopt the 
Jerusalem Declaration on Antisemitism within this Code of Conduct as the official 
definition of antisemitism for Volt Europa.  
 
Appointed Officials (AOs): Members of Volt Europa appointed to a public mandate by the 
member(s) of a public elected body. 
 
Attempted fraud or bribery: An unsuccessful effort to commit fraud or bribery. 
 
Bribery: The unlawful act of offering or receiving, in the conduct of one’s duties, any gift, 
loan, fee, reward, or other advantage (taxes, services, donations etc.) as an inducement to 
do something dishonest or illegal. 
 
Coalition: A partnership between multiple political parties. A coalition can occur before 
elections (electoral alliance), within a parliament (parliamentary groups) or within 
government (government coalition).  
 
Confidentiality: The state of keeping any information private and not sharing them with 
bodies and/or individuals outside of the original conversation, unless and/or until explicitly 
agreed otherwise by the direct participants and immediate stakeholders.  
 
12 


 
 
 
Conscious Consent: A clear, informed, and voluntary agreement to engage in a specific 
activity. Consent must be given freely, without pressure or fear of negative consequences, 
and can be withdrawn at any time. Silence or lack of resistance does not constitute 
consent. 
 
Corruption: The abuse of entrusted power for private gain. 
 
Elected Officials (EOs): Members of Volt Europa elected to a public elected body.  
 
Embezzlement: To steal money that people trust you to look after as part of your work. 
 
Extortion: The act of demanding unmerited cooperation or compensation due to coercive 
threats. 
 
Financial Conflicts: Any situation where a person’s or a family member’s financial interests 
may be affected by the movement’s policies, decisions, contracts or resource allocations.  
 
Fraud: The act of intentionally deceiving someone to gain an unfair or illegal advantage 
(financial, political, or otherwise). 
 
Gift: Goods, services, or cash offered to or by staff or board members, or their friends, 
family, or associates, at free or preferential rates. Unpaid loans are considered gifts for the 
purposes of this policy. 
 
Integrity: Integrity is a personal trait of an individual. An ethical person is intrinsically 
sincere and reliable, has no hidden agenda and does not feign emotions. An ethical person 
takes responsibility for their actions, is approachable and addresses the behaviour of 
others. The integrity of the movement is defined by the sum of the behaviour of all 
members and organs of the party. 
 
Integrity System: The integrity system of Volt Europa is composed of all the entities, 
regulations, policies, practices, and instruments which are meant to contribute to the 
integrity of the party and its members. 
 
Microaggressions: Subtle, often unintentional, statements or actions that marginalize 
individuals based on aspects of their identity, such as race, gender, religion, or disability. 
These behaviors often occur without malicious intent and stem from a lack of awareness or 
sensitivity. Examples include making assumptions about someone's abilities based on 
stereotypes or dismissing concerns related to discrimination. 
 
Money Laundering: The concealment of the origins of illegally obtained money, typically 
by transfers involving foreign banks or legitimate businesses. 
 
Negligence: Failure to give care or attention, especially when this causes harm or damage.  
 
Nepotism: Any form of favouritism based on familial or other personal relationships 
 
13 


 
 
whereby someone in an official position exploits his or her power or authority to provide a 
job or favour to a family member, even though he or she may not be qualified or deserving. 
 
Neurodivergent Communication Styles & Needs: Refers to diverse ways in which 
neurodivergent individuals, who have autism, ADHD, or dyslexia, process and engage in 
conversations. This may include a preference for written over spoken communication, 
challenges with interpreting implicit meanings, or the need for additional time to process 
and respond to information. 
 
Personal Conflicts: Favoritism, nepotism or undue influence arising from relationships 
with individuals who stand to benefit from movement decisions.  
 
Political Conflicts: Concurrent commitments to other political entities, candidates or 
causes that may influence decision-making within the movement.  
 
Professional Conflicts: Holding a position, employment or stake in organisations that 
interact with, benefit from, or compete with the movement.  
 
Robbery: The crime of taking money or property illegally, often by using threats or 
violence. 
 
Sexual Intimidation: Any behavior of a sexual nature that causes discomfort, fear, or a 
hostile environment. This includes unwelcome advances and comments, sexually 
suggestive remarks, pressure for sexual favors, or implicit threats related to a person’s 
response to such advances.  
 
Sexual Violence: Any act of a sexual nature that is committed against a person without 
their consent. This includes, but is not limited to, sexual assault, rape, coercion, or any 
physical or psychological abuse with sexual intent.  
 
Safer Spaces: Environments designed to foster a sense of physical and emotional security, 
where individuals are free from harassment or intimidation. While absolute safety cannot 
be guaranteed, these spaces prioritize inclusivity, respect, and accountability to minimize 
harm. They can exist in both physical settings (e.g., meetings, events) and digital platforms 
(e.g., group chats, forums).  
 
Theft: The crime of stealing. 
 
Transparency Registry: A transparency registry aims to inform the public which 
organisations and advocacy groups Volt supports or initiatives our Volt Officials meet with 
to clearly show which contacts and conversations, if any, help influence our decisions.  
 
Transphobic Behaviour: The core value that underlies all transphobia is a rejection of trans 
identity and a refusal to acknowledge that it could possibly be real or valid. People whose 
gender is not the same as, or does not sit comfortably with, the sex they were assigned at 
birth. Trans people may describe themselves using one or more of a variety of terms. Trans 
people are not required to have undergone any medical or social transition to be 
 
14 


 
 
considered trans.  
 
Unconscious Biases: Implicit attitudes or stereotypes that affect judgments and 
interactions without individuals being consciously aware of them. They can influence 
decision-making, communication, and workplace dynamics, often reinforcing disparities 
despite intentions to be fair and objective.  
 
Volt Officials: Either Elected Officials (EOs) or Appointed Officials (AOs) 
 
 
15 


 
 
3. Integrity entities 
To promote and safeguard ethical behaviour within Volt Europa, several integrity entities 
are established by the Board and General Assembly. These entities are tasked with 
ensuring a healthy and safe environment, especially in cases where ethical standards may 
be at risk or violated. Their mandates are dynamic and subject to ongoing discussion and 
refinement by all members of Volt Europa. 
 
For clarity, the integrity system is summarised in the following figures: 
 
Figure 1 outlines the integrity system from a member’s perspective, showing the concrete 
actions a member can take and where they can turn within the integrity framework. 
 
Figure 2 illustrates the accountability structure of the integrity entities, indicating the 
organs to which they report. 
 
 
 
16 


 
 
Figure 1: Integrity system from a member’s perspective 
 
 
17 


 
 
Figure 2: Integrity entities accountability and reporting map 
 
 
18 


 
 
3.1. Integrity Commission 
3.1.1. Purpose 
The Integrity Commission promotes ethical standards within Volt Europa by raising 
awareness of this Integrity Syllabus and processing reports of undesirable behaviour as 
outlined in the General Reporting Procedure (§3.1.7). It aims to foster a healthy and safe 
environment for members by addressing ethical violations and guiding the association on 
issues of integrity. 
 
3.1.2. Composition 
The Integrity Commission consists of at least four members, known as Integrity 
Commissioners. Two diverse and representative Co-Leads will be appointed by the Board. 
 
3.1.3. Appointment and Dismissal 
Integrity Commissioners are appointed by the Board for a term of two years, with the 
possibility of reappointment. Dismissal or suspension of an Integrity Commissioner 
requires a reasoned decision by the Board. 
Integrity Commissioners cannot hold a different function within the organisation unless 
this has been approved by the Board.  
 
3.1.4. Competences 
The Integrity Commission has the following responsibilities: 
1.​ Promote ethical behaviour: Raise awareness and promote this Integrity Syllabus 
across Volt Europa. 
2.​ Process internal and external complaints: Receive, investigate, and assess 
complaints by members of Volt Europa of undesirable behaviour from within the 
organisation or external sources, as long as the behaviour impacts Volt Europa 
and/or its members. 
3.​ Conduct investigations: Investigate complaints of unethical or undesirable 
behaviour in a timely and impartial manner. The Integrity Commission is also 
authorised to conduct investigations with regards to integrity within the association 
autonomously.  
4.​ Advise the Board: Provide reasoned advice to the Board on findings and possible 
disciplinary measures following investigations. 
5.​ Recommend sanctions: Suggest disciplinary actions in line with the Internal 
Regulations, such as warnings, temporary withdrawal of participation rights, or 
exclusion. 
 
3.1.5. Confidentiality 
The Integrity Commission maintains strict confidentiality in all its activities towards others 
than the Board. Personal information will only be disclosed to others than the Board and 
the parties involved under the following circumstances: 
1.​ A life-threatening situation arises. 
2.​ Illegal activities are suspected or reported on sufficient grounds. 
 
The Commission is responsible for ensuring proper confidentiality procedures in its 
investigations and safeguarding personal data in compliance with relevant legal privacy 
standards. 
 
19 


 
 
 
Any information received in the context of an investigation is considered confidential and 
must be treated as such by everyone with access to it. This confidentiality obligation 
applies equally to those who report information and to those who are the subjects of an 
investigation. 
 
3.1.6. Independence 
The Integrity Commission shall be impartial and shall operate independently, free from 
external influence, and make decisions based on ethical principles and expertise.  
 
3.1.7. General Reporting Procedure 
3.1.7.1. Submission of a Complaint 
1.​ Only members or bodies of Volt Europa and its staff are entitled to submit 
complaints. Complaints are submitted by email to the Integrity Commission. 
Complaints must contain the following information: 
●​ Full name of the reporter. 
●​ Full name of the person(s) concerned in the case 
●​ A detailed reason for the complaint, including the date(s) and place of the 
incident(s). 
●​ Outlining the reasonable interest in the case. 
2.​ Anonymous complaints are admissible and can be submitted through a Confidant 
Person (§3.2.2.), who will file the complaint on behalf of the reporter without 
disclosing their identity. Transparency is a key value of our organisation, which is 
why reporters are encouraged to disclose their identity. 
3.​ The reporter may withdraw their complaint at any time. In such a case, the Integrity 
Commission may still continue its investigation and report to the Board. 
3.1.7.2. Admissibility of the Complaint 
Any member of Volt Europa experiencing behaviour or acts of another member (Individual 
Member or Member Association) that is not in line with the Integrity Syllabus or the values 
of Volt, may file a complaint with the Integrity Commission. Bodies of Volt Europa may 
submit a complaint if they have reason to believe that such behaviour has occurred. 
 
A complaint is, according to the sole judgement of the Integrity Commission, considered 
admissible under the following conditions: 
1.​ The incident occurred less than two years prior to the reporting. 
2.​ The complaint has not been processed before by the European Integrity 
Commission or a national/local integrity body duly installed, unless new facts arise 
that convincingly changes the conclusion of the previous investigation. 
3.​ The nature of the complaint falls within the scope of this General Reporting 
Procedure (§3.1.7).  
4.​ The reporter has a reasonable interest in the case. 
 
20 


 
 
3.1.7.3. Processing of a Complaint 
1.​ The Co-Leads of the Commission first assess whether the Commission is authorised 
to handle the complaint and whether it is admissible. If admissible, two diverse 
Investigators are appointed from within the Commission. The reporter may submit a 
motivated objection to the appointment of mentioned Investigators. Should an 
objection be accepted by the Commission, the respective Investigator will be 
replaced by another.  
2.​ The Commission will agree on clear rules of engagement with the reporter and the 
accused (separately), which outline at minimum that they shall not interfere with 
witnesses involved and that the accused shall not retaliate.  
3.​ The Investigators collect information, including testimonies from the reporter, the 
accused, and potential witnesses. Both sides are given the opportunity to present 
their version of events and respond to each other’s statements, ensuring a fair 
hearing process. 
4.​ Throughout the investigation, the Investigators: 
●​ Ensure all relevant parties are heard. 
●​ Apply ethical and legal standards in their investigation. 
●​ Gather and verify facts in a transparent, unbiased manner. 
5.​ The Investigators have the authority to call witnesses, request additional 
information, and hold closed verbal hearings if deemed necessary. 
6.​ Wherever possible, investigations will be concluded within 3 months from the date 
of acceptance of the report. If such a deadline cannot be made, this will be clearly 
communicated to the parties involved.  
3.1.7.4. Informing the Board 
1.​ The Integrity Commission shall inform the Board of its ongoing investigations on a 
quarterly basis. In these updates, it shall not share more personal data with the 
Board than deemed necessary for information purposes.  
2.​ The Integrity Commission will inform the Board member responsible for overseeing 
Integrity bodies about the complaint as soon as possible after its submission if, in 
the Commission’s judgement: 
●​ The nature of the complaint requires Board awareness, 
●​ It is in the organisation’s best interest for the Board to be aware 
immediately, or 
●​ The complaint may lead to PR inquiries or pose reputational risks. 
3.​ If one or more Board members are directly involved in an investigation, information 
concerning that case shall be shared only with the remaining Board members. If the 
remaining Board members identify a conflict of interest when receiving the 
Integrity Commission’s advice and believe they cannot act on it impartially, they 
shall delegate the execution of sanctions to an appropriate independent body. If no 
such independent body exists, the Board must follow the Integrity Commission’s 
advice as issued. The Ombudsperson shall verify compliance with this procedure. 
3.1.7.5. Informing the Reporter and Accused 
The Integrity Commission will communicate with the reporter and the accused at key 
stages, with the most relevant information at that time: 
 
21 


 
 
●​ Acknowledging receipt of the complaint within a reasonable timeframe (rule of 
thumb: 7 calendar days). 
●​ Feedback on admissibility to reporter indicating whether an investigation will 
commence, what the next steps are, who the Investigators appointed are and a 
contact person.  
●​ Informing the accused of the investigation with key details of the complaint, such as 
a summary of the allegations against them, the next steps and a contact person. In 
principle, the name of the reporter shall not be included, unless the reporter 
explicitly consented to this. The accused shall also be informed on their rights, such 
as the right to respond and the right to present evidence or witnesses.  
●​ Providing a summary of the conclusions to both parties to inform them about the 
finalisation of the investigation.  
3.1.7.6. Conclusion and Final Advice 
1.​ The Integrity Commission will use its best efforts to complete the investigation 
within a reasonable timeframe. Upon completing the investigation, the 
Investigators present their findings to the full Integrity Commission. The 
Commission strives to issue a report to the Board within fifteen days of the 
investigation’s conclusion. In its report, the Commission will: 
●​ Recommend potential solutions for resolving the issue, if possible. 
●​ Advise on appropriate sanctions or disciplinary measures, in line with the 
Internal Regulations.  
2.​ After finalisation of the investigation, the Integrity Commission will share an 
anonymised version of their report and its conclusions with the reporter and the 
accused, and will share the confidential version of their report including their 
recommendations with the Board.  
3.​ The Board shall properly consider the recommendations and advice by the Integrity 
Commission when taking its decision on the next steps in the matter. If deemed in 
the interests of the organisation, the Board may share the anonymised version of 
the report or the recommendations with all members. The Board will always take 
into account the rights to privacy and data protection.  
4.​ In urgent cases, the Integrity Commission may issue a preliminary statement to the 
Board before the full investigation is completed. 
5.​ Decisions of the Board may be appealed before the Arbitration Committee in 
accordance with the Internal Regulations, which, inter alia, authorise the AC to 
resolve disputes over decisions by the Board and appeals by members against 
disciplinary measures imposed by the Board.  
3.1.7.7. Additional Whistleblower Protections 
For specific guidance on whistleblower rights, anonymous reporting options, protection 
against retaliation, and expected timelines, members are referred to §4 Whistleblower 
Protection and Reporting of this Integrity Syllabus. These provisions are designed to offer 
additional safety and clarity for members raising serious concerns in good faith. Reports 
submitted through this process will follow the general principles described in this section, 
with enhanced confidentiality and safeguarding measures in place.  
 
 
22 


 
 
3.1.8. Handling Complaints Against Integrity Commissioners; Conflicts of Interest 
1.​ If a report involves an Integrity Commissioner, the Commissioner in question is 
excluded from participating in any part of the investigation or assessment process.  
2.​ The Commissioners must disclose any potential conflicts of interest and may only 
take part in the investigation if full impartiality is guaranteed. 
 
3.1.9. Transparency and Accountability 
The Integrity Commission meets at least once a month, provided there are ongoing cases, 
and keeps detailed minutes of its meetings. It is responsible for developing and 
maintaining its internal procedures to ensure consistent, fair, and transparent handling of 
reports. Reports received by the Integrity Commission will be kept and securely stored in 
line with data privacy rules.  
 
If there are complaints about the (actions of the) Integrity Commission, a member can 
inform the Ombudsperson.  
 
3.1.10. Legal Liability 
Volt Europa assumes legal liability for actions taken by the Integrity Commission in its 
formal capacity. Commissioners cannot be held personally liable for their formal actions, 
except in cases where their actions constitute a criminal offence, or are performed with 
bad faith, recklessness, or deceit. 
 
3.2. Counsellor’s Office 
The Counsellor’s Office of Volt Europa shall be made up of two formal functions: 
Ombudspersons and Confidant Persons (the Counselors).  
 
Both Ombudspersons and Confident Persons commit to making themselves available on a 
short-term basis as required and respond to members within a reasonable timeframe (rule 
of thumb: 7 calendar days).  
 
Confidentiality 
The Counselors maintain strict confidentiality in all their activities and may not disclose 
personal information related to any case or individual without their consent unless: 
●​ A life-threatening situation arises. 
●​ Illegal activities are suspected or reported on sufficient grounds. 
 
Ombudspersons may request consent from the member to talk about their situation when 
signalling trends and/or otherwise informing the relevant bodies. In such cases, the 
Ombudspersons clearly communicate with the member what information they wish to 
share and with whom.  
 
The Counselors are responsible for protecting the rights of privacy and personal data of 
the people involved in all their procedures and archives. 
 
Independence 
The Counselors operate independently and make decisions based on their expertise 
without influence from the association or its entities. They must disclose any potential 
 
23 


 
 
conflicts of interest and, in such cases, agree with the parties involved if they have to 
recuse themselves from the case. 
 
Legal liability  
The legal liability for actions undertaken by the Counselors lies with Volt Europa. They 
cannot be held personally liable for their formal actions, except in cases where their 
actions constitute a criminal offence, or are performed with bad faith, recklessness, or 
deceit. 
 
3.2.1. Ombudspersons 
3.2.1.1. Purpose and Competences 
Ombudspersons provide confidential, informal, independent, and impartial support to 
members or groups of members when issues arise between them and the association. They 
assist in resolving disputes through methods such as conflict coaching, mediation, 
facilitation, and shuttle diplomacy. Additionally, they refer members to the appropriate 
entities when necessary. Ombudspersons have a signalling role, identifying and 
investigating potential structural issues within the association on their own initiative. 
3.2.1.2. Composition 
There shall be two Ombudspersons, ensuring diverse and representative appointments. 
Ombudspersons may appoint members to assist them in their efforts. Members may apply 
directly for vacancies within the Ombudspersons' team. 
3.2.1.3. Appointment, Dismissal, and Suspension 
Ombudspersons are appointed by the Board for a term of three years, with the possibility 
of reappointment. Dismissal or suspension of an Ombudsperson requires a reasoned 
decision from the Board. 
 
Ombudspersons cannot hold a different function within the organisation unless this has 
been approved by the Board.  
3.2.1.4. Admissibility 
The Ombudspersons are available to any member who experiences a problem with the 
association, its bodies, or any individual in a formal position within it.  
3.2.1.5. Meetings and Reflection 
Ombudspersons shall meet at least once a month, provided there are ongoing cases, and 
keep minutes of their meetings. Additionally, they are responsible for organising a joint 
meeting with the Board and all other integrity entities at least once every two years to 
reflect on their activities, systemic developments, and lessons learned. A report of this 
joint meeting will be made accessible to the members. 
 
24 


 
 
3.2.1.6. Procedural Guarantees 
The Board and/or any other body of the Association related to the case is required to 
properly consider any complaints or advice submitted by the Ombudspersons. The 
Ombudspersons must be kept informed of any decisions and actions related to the case. 
 
3.2.2. Confidant Persons 
3.2.2.1. Purpose and Competences 
Confidant Persons provide a safe and supportive environment for members to disclose 
confidential matters, such as (sexual) harassment, bullying, discrimination, transgressive 
behaviour, (sexual) intimidation, aggression, or violence. They offer a listening ear, help 
members explore their needs, and advise on potential next steps without imposing 
judgement or taking direct action. 
 
Confidant Persons will: 
●​ Listen and provide emotional support. 
●​ Refer members to the appropriate integrity entity. 
●​ Advise on potential courses of action. 
●​ Submit anonymous reports on behalf of members as part of the General Reporting 
Procedure, if the member wishes to remain anonymous. The Confidant Person will 
always respect a reporter’s wish for anonymity; however, it cannot be fully 
guaranteed, as the reporter’s identity may become apparent through other 
circumstances beyond their control. The reporter acknowledges this.  
 
Members are always in control of what steps to take, and Confidant Persons will respect 
their decision. 
3.2.2.2. Composition 
Volt Europa shall have at least two Confidant Persons. (Associated) Member Associations 
are encouraged to appoint regional and local Confidant Persons, who will form part of a 
broader network within the association. 
3.2.2.3. Appointment, Dismissal, and Suspension 
The Board appoints Confidant Persons for Volt Europa. Their dismissal or suspension 
require a reasoned decision by the Board. 
 
Confidant Persons cannot hold a different function within the organisation unless this has 
been approved by the Board.  
 
3.3. Mediation Team 
3.3.1. Purpose and Competences  
The Mediation Team of Volt Europa offers a structured process for resolving disputes, 
where parties voluntarily attempt to reach an agreement with the assistance of a mediator. 
 
The Mediation Team shall: 
 
25 


 
 
●​ Mediate conflicts between individual members or groups of members. 
●​ Refer inadmissible cases to the appropriate integrity entities. 
●​ Promote the Integrity Syllabus and mediation within the association. 
●​ Coach, train, and assist other integrity entities in their efforts. 
 
3.3.2. Composition 
The Mediation Team shall consist of a pool of mediators, which may include regional or 
local mediators from (Associated) Member Associations ((A)MAs). Regional and local 
mediators are encouraged to join the Volt Europa pool of mediators. 
Two Co-Leads, appointed by the Board of Volt Europa, will: 
●​ Coordinate the case-processing. 
●​ Nominate mediators for each case. 
●​ Handle administrative tasks. 
●​ Assist mediators with administrative efforts. 
●​ Promote the Mediation Team throughout the organisation. 
 
3.3.3. Appointment, Dismissal, and Suspension  
Mediators from (A)MAs may join the Volt Europa pool directly. Other candidates will be 
appointed by the Co-Leads. The dismissal or suspension of a mediator requires a reasoned 
decision by the Co-Leads, which will be reported to the Board, or the dismissal or 
suspension of the Co-Leads requires a reasoned decision by the Board. 
 
Mediation Team members cannot hold a different function within the organisation unless 
this has been approved by the Board. 
 
3.3.4. Admissibility  
A request for mediation is admissible if: 
●​ It involves a conflict between members or groups of members. 
●​ At least one party requests mediation and the opposing party agrees. 
 
The Mediation Team has the right to assess whether a request is admissible and can be 
handled by mediation. If a case is deemed inadmissible, the team will refer it to the 
appropriate integrity entity. 
 
3.3.5. Mediation Procedure 
The mediation procedure follows these key stages: 
1.​ Request for Mediation: Any member or group of members may submit a mediation 
request. The opposing party must agree to the mediation for it to proceed. 
2.​ Nomination of Mediators: The Co-Leads will nominate mediators from the pool. 
Both parties will be informed of the appointed mediators and may raise any 
objections. 
3.​ Pre-Mediation Meeting: An initial meeting will be held to explain the mediation 
process, set expectations, and confirm voluntary participation from both parties. 
The parties will be asked to sign a Mediation Contract (§3.3.6) confirming their 
commitment to the process and agreeing not to pursue legal actions while 
mediation is ongoing. 
 
26 


 
 
4.​ Mediation Sessions: The mediator will facilitate structured sessions where both 
parties have the opportunity to present their views, propose solutions, and 
negotiate. Sessions can be face-to-face or follow a shuttle diplomacy approach. 
5.​ Mediation Agreement: If the parties reach a settlement, a Mediation Agreement 
will be drafted, outlining the terms of the resolution. Both parties must sign the 
agreement. 
6.​ Conclusion of Mediation: If mediation fails or is terminated by either party, the 
mediator will document the outcome, and the case will be closed.  
 
3.3.6. Mediation Contract 
Before mediation begins, all parties must sign a Mediation Contract. This contract serves as 
a formal agreement that: 
●​ The parties commit to engaging in the mediation process in good faith. 
●​ No legal actions will be initiated while mediation is ongoing. 
●​ The confidentiality of the mediation process will be respected. 
The contract remains in force until the mediation is formally declared concluded or failed 
by one or both parties. 
 
3.3.7. Confidentiality 
The Mediation Team of Volt Europa has strict confidentiality in their activities and is not 
allowed to disclose any personal information or case-specific details to anyone outside of 
the mediation, unless: 
●​ A life-threatening situation arises. 
●​ Illegal activities are suspected or reported on sufficient grounds. 
 
Confidentiality may be waived only if all parties explicitly agree as part of the mediation 
outcome or mediation agreement. The Mediation Team may share anonymised information 
on cases for training purposes. 
 
The Mediation Team is responsible for protecting the rights of privacy and personal data of 
the people involved in all their procedures and archives. 
 
3.3.8. Independence 
The Mediation Team shall be impartial and operate independently, based on its expertise. 
Mediators must disclose any potential conflicts of interest and may only continue 
mediation if full impartiality is guaranteed, with explicit consent from the parties. 
 
3.3.9. Internal Procedures 
The Mediation Team shall be responsible for creating and maintaining its own internal 
procedures for case handling, mediation practices, and coordination with other integrity 
entities. 
 
3.3.10. Legal Liability 
The legal liability for the actions of the Mediation Team lies with Volt Europa. Mediators 
and other members of the team cannot be held personally liable for their actions in their 
formal capacity, except in cases where the actions of Mediators or other members of the 
team constitute a criminal offence, or are performed with bad faith, recklessness, or deceit. 
 
27 


 
 
 
3.4. Integrity interaction models, Reports / Complaints Model 
Volt is a pan-European movement whose members come from a variety of countries. Those 
members are all members of a National Chapter within Volt. Because Volt is structured on 
multiple levels and consists of multiple legal entities, members from different National 
Chapters interact with each other all the time. Sometimes however, an interaction between 
members of different National Chapters can be found undesirable by one of the members. 
Integrity Commissions are there to investigate complaints or reports of undesirable 
behaviour by members of Volt. Within Volt, there are different types of National Chapters: 
 
(Associated) Member Associations: legal entities which are associated with Volt Europa. 
 
Legal entities which are not yet associated with Volt Europa: legal entities which carry 
the name Volt, but are not associated with Volt Europa in a legal way. 
 
National Chapters which are not yet a legal entity: any kind of organisation that carries 
the name Volt but is not a legal entity yet. Members of these organisations are, legally 
speaking, members of Volt Europa only. 
 
The legal structure of these types of National Chapters require different approaches on 
the processing of reports by the National Chapters (see Figure 3).  
 
28 


 
 
 
 
29 


 
 
4. Whistleblower Protection and Reporting 
4.1. Purpose 
Whistleblowing is a courageous act of integrity. Volt recognises its value and commits to 
safeguarding those who raise concerns to protect the values and credibility of our 
movement. 
 
Volt Europa commits to making this policy widely accessible and easily understandable. 
Integrity entities are responsible for raising awareness about these protections through 
training, communication, and guidance documents. 
 
4.2. Scope 
This policy applies to anyone submitting a complaint in accordance with this Integrity 
Syllabus. It covers the reporting of: 
●​ Violations of the Code of Conduct 
●​ Unethical, discriminatory, or abusive behaviour 
●​ Harassment, intimidation, or violence 
●​ Corruption, fraud, or financial misconduct 
●​ Conflicts of interest or misuse of power 
●​ Violations of applicable laws or internal regulations 
 
4.3. Who Can Report 
Any person may report concerns to the Integrity bodies of Volt Europa, to the extent the 
concern relates to the conduct of a Volt Europa member and has a direct impact on the 
movement or its members. If a concern is raised by a person who is not a member of Volt, 
they must go through the Ombudsperson who can submit a report on their behalf. 
 
4.4. Reporting Channels 
Reports may be submitted to any of the following entities in accordance with the 
provisions of this Integrity Syllabus: 
●​ Integrity Commission (via email or secure form) 
●​ Confidant Persons (including anonymous reports) 
●​ Ombudspersons (for informal conflict resolution and guidance) 
 
All reports must contain sufficient detail to be investigated. 
 
4.5. Protection Against Retaliation 
No person submitting a report shall face retaliation, discrimination, or any disadvantage for 
reporting a concern in good faith. Volt Europa will treat any form of retaliation as a serious 
violation of this Code and may impose disciplinary measures against the perpetrator. 
This protection applies regardless of the outcome of the investigation. Honest mistakes or 
misunderstandings are protected; knowingly false or malicious complaints are not. 
To be protected under this policy, the complaint must be made in good faith and based on 
honest concern, even if ultimately unfounded. Deliberate false reporting, harassment, or 
manipulation of the system will not be tolerated and may lead to sanctions. 
 
30 


 
 
 
4.6. Confidentiality 
As set out in this Integrity Syllabus, confidentiality and data privacy is a key aspect of the 
procedures with the Integrity bodies. Members who report concerns are encouraged to 
identify themselves to the respective body instead of submitting an anonymous report (to 
allow for better communication and support), but this is not required. 
 
Anonymous reports are accepted if submitted (primarily) through a Confidant Person 
(§3.2.2) or, if the case is dealt with by an Ombudsperson, an Ombudsperson. The respective 
councilor will not disclose the identity of the reporter, unless the reporter consents. The 
councilors will always respect a reporter’s wish for anonymity; however, it cannot be fully 
guaranteed, as the reporter’s identity may become apparent through other circumstances 
beyond their control. The reporter acknowledges this. 
 
31 
