Volt’s Mapping of Policies
Edition 8.3
Challenge 1 - Smart State
1


Table of contents:
Vision
4
Administrative effectiveness in order to cut waste and improve service quality
5
Digital revolution(A)
5
In public administration
5
In e-Governance
6
In Healthcare
7
In the Legal System
7
In Security
8
Talent and a good reputation
8
Shared competences
9
Transparent state
9
Build an enabling education system for the future
12
Pre-primary education
12
Primary and secondary education
13
Citizens’ Basics
13
Innovative approaches and techniques
14
Curriculum reform
15
Teacher satisfaction
16
Buildings and Infrastructure
16
Higher and vocational education
17
Excellence
18
Make high quality healthcare available to everyone
19
Alignment of European healthcare systems
19
Access to healthcare
20
Focus on preventive healthcare
22
Lifestyle choices and diseases
22
Minors should have access to preventive healthcare programs
24
Reduce environmental risks
25
Data-driven prevention
25
Empowering and educating patients
26
Ageing populations
27
Healthcare for the elderly
27
Supporting fertility and childcare
28
Innovation and research
29
Healthcare professionals
31
Nurses
31
Doctors/general
31
Midwives
32
Healthcare expenditures and efficiency
32
Sexual and reproductive health and rights
33
Options and rights in pregnancy and birth
33
Ensure a fair legal system, effective law enforcement, and anti-corruption legislation
36
Intelligent judicial systems
36
Fighting corruption
37
Ending tax avoidance and evasion and increasing tax collection efficiency
38
Corporate social responsibility and accountability
39
Law enforcement and police operations
40
Prison reform
40
2


Guarantee digital rights and freedom
42
Internet access
42
Digital education
42
Digital single market
43
Digital rights
43
Security and Safety
44
Ethical approach
44
Open-Source Solutions
46
Open-Source Software (FLOSS)
46
Support Research
48
3


Challenge 1 - Smart State
I.
Vision
European citizens and residents expect their governments and public institutions to
provide effective and efficient, high-quality public services as well as transparent
public administrations. Europe, over decades of integration, has set a standard of
quality in public provision, allowing for an unprecedented high quality of life for
citizens and a unique European social model.
However, in the wake of the economic crisis, growing inequality, and emerging
technologies, trust in public institutions has disintegrated, while endemic corruption
and inefficiency continue to plague public life.
For Volt, public service is first and foremost intended to serve citizens and residents.
We hold as core tenets the principles of management by objectives, transparency,
accountability,
citizen
empowerment,
and
subsidiarity
in
the
allocation
of
competencies.
Volt will work to ensure that, across the European Union, public institutions in the
Member States are reformed into a modern, forward-looking community with
state-of-the-art technology and new thinking to tackle the preceding years of crisis
and periods of economic recession, and in some cases, decades of neglect.
In times of transformation, governments must adapt to enable every citizen to fully
participate in and contribute to society, and provide for maximal social inclusion and
mobility. Digital services should be used when digitisation improves analogue
services. Smart States must adopt new tools to earn their citizens' trust through
accountable, transparent, and efficient governance. Volt will invest in our common
future, including not only innovative public services to cut waste, but also innovative
education systems, quality healthcare, and an effective investigative and judicial
system to combat corruption. Together, we can use technology for common
prosperity.
4


II.
Administrative effectiveness in order to cut waste
and improve service quality
Digital technology affects nearly every aspect of our daily lives and must start playing
a key role in the way our countries are governed. Volt wants to digitise public services
to reduce waste, cut inefficiencies and corruption, ensure transparency and security,
and make the State a true servant of its citizens.
A. Digital revolution(A)
Making digital solutions the backbone of our administration provides key tools to
improve both internal processes (back-end) and external services (front-end), reducing
inefficiencies whilst strengthening relations between administrations and citizens.
Digital tools must be embedded in every policy decision as a means and not an end.
To realise this, we advocate for using proven and emerging technologies to provide
public services with a user-centric approach, and to facilitate and monitor transactions
as well as citizens’ data storage. Examples of innovative services are e-Taxation, digital
ID, e-Voting, e-Health, and e-Residency, which can be pursued through emerging
technologies such as blockchain ledgers.
1. In public administration
➢Create paperless administration wherever it doesn’t yet exist. Volt will aim
to create an infrastructure for completely paperless processes1 as well as
harmonised Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) standards2 in
order to maintain competitiveness, reduce waste and implement efficient
services while increasing interoperability between databases, platforms and
applications. Each action pursuing this goal will take into account three
elements: organisation, tools, and the government-citizen relationship. New
and improved services will be easily usable and accessible from different
devices at the same time. Public entities will re-engineer their internal
processes, adapting them to new tools, organisations and applications. Finally,
services will be interconnected through the use of homogeneous standards.
➢Create safe and effective digital infrastructure to enable innovation.
Improvements in digital infrastructure will be prioritised to meet the future
needs of the private sector and of the citizens.
2 European Commission, ICT standardisation, available at
http://ec.europa.eu/growth/industry/policy/ict-standardisation_en
1 European Commission, Digital Public Services, available at
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/digital-public-services-scoreboard
5


○
The introduction of fibre optic networks will be accelerated to boost
internet speed; internet coverage will also be significantly improved.3
○
City sensors,4 community WiFi, and consolidated infrastructures will be
implemented to achieve cost efficiency and guarantee service coverage.
This will also enable a greater use of shared platforms to provide
administrative services (i.e. HR and financial management)5 as well as
individual services like cloud usage.
○
All new technologies will be vetted using a Proof of Concept model to
demonstrate
their
feasibility
by
testing
their
practicality before
implementation.
2. In e-Governance
➢Foster the adoption of electronic identification and trust services for
electronic transactions and digital signatures,6 speeding up processes such as
signing electronic rental contracts, accessing confidential files, and submitting
online taxation. Blockchain ledgers could foster the diffusion of digital identity
across the European Union, and their adoption is supported by using cases and
pilot studies that have already taken place.7
○
Ensure all pilot studies include requirements for at least two-factor
authentication (e.g., through a PIN1, PIN2 system).
○
Certify the authenticity and integrity of digital services in accordance
with data protection requirements.
➢Disseminate the Estonian e-Residency model to enable non-EU actors to set
up a business that can operate within the European Single Market.8
➢Use big data and predictive analytic systems to better tailor policies and
government services to citizens’ needs.9 This data should be used during the
policy process (where applicable), while at all times upholding the highest
standards of privacy and data protection and protecting fundamental rights.
9 European Commission, Making Big Data work for Europe, available at
https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/big-data
8 Start a Company, Republic of Estonia e-Residency, available at
https://e-resident.gov.ee/start-a-company/
7 OpenGovAsia, How the Dutch government is exploring blockchain use cases through many concurrent
pilot projects, available at
https://www.opengovasia.com/articles/how-the-dutch-government-is-exploring-potential-uses-of-block
chain-through-many-concurrent-pilot-projects;
6 European Commission, Digital Single Market, available at https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en
5 Government of Canada, Shared Services Canada, available at
https://www.canada.ca/en/shared-services.html; Department of Public Expenditure and Reform of the
Government of the Republic of Ireland, An Examination of Shared Services in the Irish Public Service
and Internationally, available at
https://assets.gov.ie/5165/201218160319-a9036a6133464e51a378cc3cf3d27879.pdf
4 Smart Santander, Santander Facility, available at
http://www.smartsantander.eu/index.php/testbeds/item/132-santander-summary
3 For more details, see Smart State, Guarantee Digital Rights and Freedom, Internet Access
6


➢Grant access to and use open data formats to increase government
transparency and provide citizens and enterprises with information that either
increases accountability and efficient governance or may be used for research
purposes. Organise hackathons where data is made available to allow
developers to improve existing IT infrastructure and applications, create
innovative solutions, and increase the cyber security of public infrastructure.
3. In Healthcare
➢Diffuse e-healthcare practices at the national level, ensuring patients’
records10 and their clinical histories can be easily shared among hospitals and
general practitioners; and implement Europe-wide e-prescription policies to
ensure easy and secure access to prescribed medication for citizens that live,
work, or otherwise are abroad.11 Emerging technologies such as blockchain
ledgers can support the development of these digital services.12
➢Develop a public e-booking system for specialists to reduce costly waiting
lists.
4. In the Legal System
➢Make
legal
proceedings
more
accessible.
Governments
need
to
be
accountable for each document that is produced with regard to legal
proceedings, utilising the emerging technologies to adequately store it and
share it with all the involved stakeholders.13 Facilitating the right of access to
documents or information held by public administrations will make the actions
of public bodies transparent and guarantee the protection of legitimate
interests and citizens' rights. Moreover, emerging technologies will facilitate
the protection of documents and information such as sensitive data or
information concerning public order. This would make it more difficult to deny
an applicant’s request to access in order to protect opaque interests.
13 OpenGovAsia, How the Dutch Government is exploring blockchain use cases through many
concurrent pilot projects, available at
https://opengovasia.com/how-the-dutch-government-is-exploring-blockchain-use-cases-through-many-
concurrent-pilot-projects/
12 OpenGovAsia, Blockchain and the public sector - What happened in 2016, available at
https://www.opengovasia.com/articles/7274-blockchain-and-the-public-sector-developments-in-2016
11 e-Estonia, e-Prescription, available at https://e-estonia.com/solutions/healthcare/e-prescription/
10 e-Estonia, e-health records, available at
https://e-estonia.com/solutions/healthcare/e-health-record/
7


5. In Security
➢Pursue the usage of blockchain ledgers, such as the Keyless Signature
Infrastructure (KSI) Blockchain used in Estonia, to make data manipulation
impossible, thus making donations to public actors transparent and traceable.14
B. Talent and a good reputation
Revive, strengthen, and reward motivation and performance among public sector
employees to increase responsiveness to the changing environment and to citizens’
needs.
Foster
an
agile
environment
to
stimulate
public
sector
employees’
performance, their growth, and career opportunities.
➢Set up innovation-teams within local and central administrations. Public
sector digitisation must be considered as a means, not an end. For this reason,
we propose setting up “i-teams”15 that will develop digital solutions to tackle
the most pressing issues in their area of competence and then monitor their
implementation.
These
teams
will
combine
digital
and
service design
competences, ensuring that new tools and services fit citizens’ capabilities and
needs.16
➢Facilitate new skill learning in public sector jobs. Public bodies will provide a
wide range of training courses to their employees, enabling them to develop
relevant skills such as project management and IT skills that are required in
such a rapidly changing environment. All public sector employees will have
these competences certified. They can experience and learn from private
sector dynamics by participating in “public-private sector exchanges”.
➢Open the position-based recruitment system in public administration17
across
Europe
to
attract
talents
from
all
academic
and
professional
backgrounds within ministries and public bodies; people from different careers
offer specific skills. Special entry points for young talent may include
programmes that offer specific challenges to recruit those who respond best to
these tests.18
18 Ministère du Budget, des Comptes Publics de la Fonction Publique,  Administration and the Civil
Service in the EU 27 Member States, available at
https://www.fonction-publique.gouv.fr/files/files/publications/etudes_perspectives/Administration_an
d_the_Civil_service_in_the_27_EU_Member_states.pdf
17 OECD, Acquiring capacity, available at http://www.oecd.org/gov/pem/acquiringcapacity.htm
16 The Behavioural Insight Team, Easy Attractive Social Timely, available at
http://38r8om2xjhhl25mw24492dir.wpengine.netdna-cdn.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/BIT-Public
ation-EAST_FA_WEB.pdf
15 Nesta, The teams and funds making innovation happen in governments around the world, available at
https://www.nesta.org.uk/report/i-teams-the-teams-and-funds-making-innovation-happen-in-governm
ents-around-the-world/
14 KSI Blockchain. See e-Estonia, available at
https://e-estonia.com/solutions/security-and-safety/ksi-blockchain/
8


➢Implement a management-by-objectives system composed of financial and
non-financial incentives to improve public sector employees’ performance and
accelerate the career paths of skilled professionals. Performance will be
evaluated based on outcomes.
➢Introduce attractive, fair remuneration and advancement for all public
sector employees as well as high quality entry-level positions in the public
sector.
C. Shared competences
Identify and avoid inefficient or ineffective duplication of shared competences at all
levels of public administration to clarify accountability and decision-making processes.
Decision makers must be accountable to their constituency for the use of public funds
and their outcomes. Clear and demarcated competences’ allocation between state,
regional, and local levels fosters greater accountability from political representatives.
➢Apply the subsidiarity principle to ensure the most effective and efficient
distribution of administrative and legal competences at local, national, and EU
levels.
D. Transparent state
Ensure full transparency in the use of public resources: how they are accounted for,
where they come from and how they are spent. Monitor tendering processes to make
certain that public procurement delivers “best value for money” (BVM).19Competitive
proposals for the delivery of public services ensure better outcomes for citizens, while
a transparent system limits fraud.
➢Exploit the role of the European Court of Auditors in the governance of
National Audit Offices for a better use of public funds, both at the European
and national level, aiming to homogenise the public sector accounting
standards20 and share best practices among countries21 (i.e. production of
Whole of Government Accounts (WGA) at a national level).22 The Court should
22 National Audit Office (NAO), Whole of Government Accounts 2018-2019, available at
https://www.nao.org.uk/report/whole-of-government-accounts-2018-19/
21 European Court of Auditors, 2018 ECA Award for research on public sector auditing, available at
https://www.eca.europa.eu/en/Pages/ECA-Award-2018.aspx
20 European Commission, Eurostat, EPSAS Standard, Overview, available at
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/epsas/,Eurostat, Government finance statistics and EDP statistics -
Government accounting, available at
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/government-finance-statistics/government-accounting
19 National Audit Office (NAO), Assessing value for money, available at
https://www.nao.org.uk/successful-commissioning/general-principles/value-for-money/assessing-value
-for-money/
9


be strengthened to ensure that public funds are used to correctly and
efficiently implement policies, monitoring coherence between policy design
and implementation.
➢Strengthen the ability of national audit offices23 to review the activities, size,
and objectives of public sector entities and public policy programmes without
jeopardising the speed and quality of services. They should conduct periodic
independent assessments of all public assets and enterprises to test their
effectiveness and increase efficiency, and test innovative public finance and
budgeting techniques.
➢Centralise procurement processes or use aggregation vehicles like framework
agreements and consolidated contracts to achieve economies of scale and
make processes more efficient. The central platform for public procurement
(TED)24 should be integrated within the existing national e-procurement
platforms.25 Interoperability and data exchange needs to be ensured in order
to enable cross-national bids and to eliminate existing lock-in effects.
➢Improve
market
knowledge,26
for
instance
through
research
and
pre-commercial procurement practices, to better define public sector needs in
multi-annual and annual procurement planning.
➢Foster better, more effective, and transparent use of public-private
partnerships (PPP) and results-based outsourcing only in cases of a clear
benefit for citizens, when market externalities, such as environmental and
societal
impacts,
accountability,
and
possible
perverse
incentives,
are
accounted for. It is necessary to carry out thorough impact assessments for
important outsourcing initiatives with potentially large impacts on public
welfare. Public provision of services must also be evaluated on the same
thorough basis as PPP.
➢Establish and expand the use of cooperatives and mutuals in the provision
of public goods and services to strengthen democratic accountability, citizen
participation, and effective delivery and shared ownership.27
27 European Parliament, European Parliament resolution of 15 June 2017 on a European Agenda for the
collaborative economy (2017/2003(INI)), available at
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?type=TA&language=EN&reference=P8-TA-2017-0271,
Cooperatives Europe, Vision paper: A cooperative vision for the collaborative economy, available at
https://coopseurope.coop/vision-paper-cooperative-vision-collaborative-economy
26 European Commission, Public procurement - a study on administrative capacity in the EU, available at
http://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/en/policy/how/improving-investment/public-procurement/study;
25 European Commission, E-Procurement, available at
http://ec.europa.eu/growth/single-market/public-procurement/e-procurement_en;
24
European
Union,
TED
home
-
TED
tenders
electronic
daily,
available
at
http://ted.europa.eu/TED/main/HomePage.do
23 Overview, National Audit Office (NAO), available at https://www.nao.org.uk/about-us/
10


III.
Build an enabling education system for the future
Whilst fostering social mobility and inclusion, education is one of the ways to unite
people in a vibrant and dynamic democracy based on open, pluralistic societies.
Europe faces extremely diverse regional education challenges. Volt will ensure that
schools are inspiring, safe, attractive, and stimulating workplaces. With the aim of
creating equal opportunities and access to high-quality education, Volt aims to
enable reflective and responsible development for every single child living in the
European Union. Volt will also support extracurricular learning as well as informal and
non-formal education. Lifelong learning and vocational training must be accessible
to all throughout their professional and personal lives, in order to offer people
opportunities regardless of age. There will be a strong emphasis on early-age
education. Finally, there must be greater investment in European higher education,
along with research and development. High-quality higher education must be
accessible and available to everybody, irrespective of background. Education must
provide the necessary ingredients for enriching personal development and open up a
wide range of opportunities for allowing people residing in the European Union to
contribute to society.
In order to build a system that empowers citizens to partake in and contribute to
society, education requires major reforms to develop the basic skills for a
participatory society, stimulate civic engagement, and foster and reward excellence.
As it is Volt’s founding principle to design policies based on best practices, we
consider Finland’s effective school reform as an example to emulate. Its key
achievements include an emphasis on pre-primary education; providing resources for
high-quality teacher training and adequate pay for teachers; short school hours; and a
light homework load; in addition to providing free meals and free transport to school.
Volt considers these the foundation for the future of learning. Let's work together to
transform schools into an inspiring place for knowledge transfer and enlightenment
for students and teachers alike.
A. Pre-primary education
While public institutions will support and complement parents in a variety of ways,
parents will always retain the primary responsibility for the welfare and flourishing of
a child. The objectives of early childhood education are to support children’s growth
towards becoming ethically responsible members of society; to provide children with
the knowledge and skills necessary in life; and to improve children’s learning
conditions. Therefore, there is a need to increase its quality and accessibility.
➢Ensure that preschools and kindergartens are accessible to all children for
free.28
28 For more details see Social Equality, Alleviate Poverty, Youth
11


➢Creative playful pre-primary education: following the Finnish model, Volt will
place a strong emphasis on early education.29 Early childhood education and
care programmes (e.g. mentoring programmes) like in Finland provide positive
role models and improve children’s development.30
➢Establish rehabilitation working groups made up of representatives from
health care services, members of the voluntary and statutory sectors, child care
and family counselling, and the school sector. These groups exist to organise
daycare and education for children with special needs and, support the
monitoring of growth and learning.31
➢Ensure access to programmes for children under 6, such as speech therapy
and support from child psychologists.
B. Primary and secondary education
Particular attention needs to be paid to primary and secondary education as it is a key
factor in social inequality. Volt aims to develop a truly comprehensive system that will
generate more informed, involved, and empowered citizens to close the inequality
gap.
1. Citizens’ Basics
➢Provide free, healthy, daily school meals to all students to break the cycle of
hunger and child poverty. Access to free meals has nutritional, learning, and
health benefits and supports productivity and educational success.32
➢Ensure that high-quality internet connection access and connectivity to
technology,33 in terms of the fastest available mobile network connections and
WiFi, reach rural areas and other marginalised communities as soon as possible.
This is absolutely essential for children's education nowadays, as it provides
quick access to information from a variety of sources. However, its use needs to
be accompanied by the teaching of critical thinking skills.
33 For more details see Guarantee Digital Rights and Freedom, Digital rights.
32 Journal of School Health, Nutrition and Student Performance at School, available at
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1746-1561.2005.00025.x
31 OECD, Early Childhood Education and Care Policy in Finland, available at
http://www.oecd.org/finland/2476019.pdf
30 Denmark’s forest pre-schools, developed by pedagogues and researchers, are also a best practice.
Besides a healthy development, they also aim at developing a responsible use of natural resources. See
Growing Wild Forest School, A Brief History of Forest Schools Around The World, available at
https://www.growingwildforestschool.org/post/the-brief-history-heritage-of-forest-schools-around-the
-world
29 For more details see https://minedu.fi/en/early-childhood-education-and-care
12


➢Strengthen the educational system by expanding the funding of public
schools in urban and rural areas. Every child is given the opportunity to attend
a well-developed school.
➢Create special integration programmes for migrant children to help them
adapt to a new culture, language, and environment.
2. Innovative approaches and techniques
Make education effective and accessible for a wider range of students’ abilities and
talents. Investigate long-term trends and regularly update curricula to be in line with
our changing societies. Support the development of new tools and education
parameters.
➢Invest in research to find better and more creative ways to teach, like
phenomenon-based learning (teaching by topic),34 peer-to-peer learning,
experimental approaches, value-based education, and competence-based
education to facilitate creativity and imagination. Encourage every child to
build on their strengths while securing minimum standards and encouraging
children to learn through taking some responsibility, participation and civic
awareness.35
➢Introduce new approaches to measure the success of schools, such as
student enrollment and dropout rates; staff retention and professional
development; and school connectivity via funding raised from philanthropy;
parent engagement and community satisfaction metrics.
➢Incentivise the development of digital skills, both in early education and in
preparation for the professional realm (coding classes; etc.).
➢Strengthen the educational system through improved online courses and
provide the best-needs based education for all, especially for students living in
remote areas.
➢Review neuroscientific and biological research papers on learning, attention,
and concentration, e.g. in relation to lesson times, exam times, etc., and try to
find new class schedules.36
3. Curriculum reform
➢Ensure English fluency, as English is one of the undisputed linguae francae in
international communication, particularly within and between partners of the
36 UC Berkeley, Poor grades tied to class times that don’t match our biological clocks, available at
http://news.berkeley.edu/2018/03/29/social-jetlag/
35 Cats Forum, Children as Actors Transforming Society, available at catsconference.com/
34 Phenomenal Education, Phenomenon based learning, available at
http://www.phenomenaleducation.info/phenomenon-based-learning.html
13


EU. Simultaneously, put a greater focus on the mastery of the native language
to foster adequate public engagement within local communities.
➢Emphasise
STEAM37 subjects that will be supplemented by commonly
accessible multilingual digital resources and are actively connected to the arts
and creativity. Concurrently, exemplary public and civil society initiatives like
WISE (Women in Science and Engineering) that work to empower women and
girls in the sector through mentoring and peer-to-peer networks should be
expanded.38 Technical education must be used as a tool of social and
professional inclusion that enables those who are underrepresented or
marginalised in the field to excel, particularly in closing the gender gap in STEM
or overcoming socio-economic obstacles.
➢Focus on citizenship education and how a political system works, from the
local council to the national government and the European Union. Make
citizenship education a priority.
➢In the final two years of secondary school, make "life competences and
responsibility" a mandatory subject (one hour per week), covering topics such
as economics and basic financial literacy, legal basics, social skills, sustainability,
healthy lifestyle, and school cooperation with their local environment.
➢Reform educational programmes and curricula so that they actively teach
tolerance
and
intercultural
dialogue,
civic
engagement,
overcoming
prejudices, and promoting democratic values. Prioritise courses on gender
equality, overcoming gender stereotypes and discrimination, as well as sexual
and relationship education.
➢Improve education on mental health and well-being that must address the
challenges that people of all age groups face in a world of constant
connectivity,
socio-economic
marginalisation
and
online
bullying
and
harassment.
➢Introduce classes on media literacy that explore creativity and empathy
through art forms such as drama, film, and music.
➢Increase the emphasis on learning skills and competences, e.g., oral
communication (also in front of wider audiences), debating and written skills.
C. Teacher satisfaction
38 WISE, Campaign for Gender Balance in Science, Technology and Engineering, available at
https://www.wisecampaign.org.uk/
37 Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts and Mathematics
14


Attract more qualified people to become teachers who stay motivated in their job by
raising the reputation of and compensation for this important profession.
➢Support annual education summits held by the European Union.39
➢Reform teacher training by offering more practical experience, reviewing
the conditions of admission and supporting lateral entrants.
➢Pay and compensate for extracurricular activities and overtime work.
➢Invest in emotional support, counselling, psychological support, and care
for teachers provided by specialised staff and in close collaboration with local
medical facilities.
➢Prioritise investments in schools and teachers in communities facing social
exclusion.
➢Encourage and reward long-term teacher commitment. Give teachers and
education professionals more say in shaping education policy.
➢Focus on teaching for and through creativity, with new work structures and
work environments. Introduce assessment models based on 360° feedback.
D. Buildings and Infrastructure
➢Transform education centres into community centres for the exchange of
ideas.
➢Invest in new or renovated facilities and buildings that facilitate the learning
of future-oriented skills, such as networking, where possible within their
architecture. Functional versions of these concepts already exist; we just have
to spread them all over Europe. One such example is Orestad high school in
Copenhagen.40
E. Higher and vocational education
In today's world, there is a greater demand for highly skilled and socially engaged
people. In the period up to 2025, half of all jobs are expected to require high-level
qualifications.41 Digital technology is making jobs more flexible and complex. People
41 European Commission, Education and Training, About higher education policy, available at
https://ec.europa.eu/education/policies/higher-education/about-higher-education-policy_en
40 To have a look at this amazing school building, see 3xn, Can a building help the education process?,
available at http://3xn.com/project/orestad-college
39 European Commission, Second European Education Summit, available at
https://ec.europa.eu/education/education-summit_en
15


will need to handle
complex information, think independently and creatively, use
resources (including digital ones), communicate effectively, and be resilient. Creativity
and transversality are crucial for personal development and solving societal problems.
Every citizen should always have the opportunity to achieve
higher levels of
education, regardless of the choices they have made at different stages of their lives.
Volt aims to revitalise tertiary education with innovative measures to keep pace with
new trends.
➢Expand Erasmus+ by significantly increasing its budget and improving
accessibility, outreach, and awareness of the opportunities it provides.
Currently, the dissemination of information about the programme is done
through DG EAC’s42 platform, but we want to ensure greater collaboration with
national and regional institutions to reach the places that would benefit most
from this exchange.
➢Expand Erasmus Pro for apprenticeships and ensure it reaches people from all
walks of life and all socio-economic backgrounds in both educational and
vocational programmes.
➢Facilitate intersectoral mobility between universities and other higher
educational institutions on the one hand, and the private and third sector on
the other. This would promote the exchange of different perspectives to
enable highly qualified individuals to pursue flexible careers.
➢Create a prize for best teacher(s) in the EU.
➢Open discussions about the design of the university of the future, e.g., open
access for all residents of a given region, and online lectures.
➢Enable
students
to
continue
their
education
through
scholarship
opportunities for post-baccalaureate and for older students who wish to
continue their education to promote lifelong learning.
42 Directorate General for Education and Culture
16


F. Excellence
Create centres of excellence in selected universities and colleges to gain international
recognition, attract talent, foster innovation and create synergies with the private
sector where appropriate and relevant, while preserving academic freedom and the
integrity of the education system.
➢Invest in universities in economically disadvantaged areas to attract
students and resources.
➢Invest in education centres linked to local crafts and excellence (e.g. Napoli
School for tailors and dairy producers).
➢Involve companies and civil society in the design of selected courses and
seminars to ensure that the required competences are created and to achieve a
greater degree of mobility between educational institutions.
17


IV.
Make
high
quality
healthcare
available
to
everyone
In line with the World Health Organisation (WHO), Volt defines health as a state of
complete physical, mental, and social well-being rather than merely the absence of
disease
or
infirmity.
Mental
and
physical diseases and disabilities must be
destigmatised in a mindful society. Volt believes that an efficient and sustainable
healthcare system emphasises prevention rather than treatment and reduces the
human and financial cost of disease management.
Based on these principles, Volt aims to create a world-class healthcare system. Volt
will invest in improving universal access to healthcare. Everywhere on the continent, it
should be possible to see a GP or specialist within a few days and receive timely
treatment (and reduce the cost of waiting lists). In addition, access to mental
healthcare needs to be improved. Effective e-health tools must become an integral
part of healthcare provision to increase access to care. Moreover, Volt will allocate
more resources to preventive healthcare, with a special focus on the ageing society,
lifestyle diseases, and children’s health and resilience. Volt aims to create an efficient
healthcare system in which caregivers are empowered to provide the best care based
on the needs and wishes of the patient. Overall, closer collaboration between the
medical and healthcare professions in relation to physical, mental, and social health
will be key to improving the quality and efficiency of healthcare.
A. Alignment of European healthcare systems
➢Ensure universal health coverage and access to healthcare for all European
residents.
➢Develop European guidelines based on benchmarking and “best in class”
performance for waiting times, diagnostics, and treatments to improve the
quality of healthcare. To this end, Volt proposes to implement a system of
annual reviews of public healthcare within a framework of the European
Semester (e.g., through co-operation with various research organisations such
as the Health Consumer Powerhouse).43
➢Work towards an efficient and high-quality healthcare system, which
requires continuous optimisation of coordination and cooperation between
public institutions, healthcare providers and market participants. Healthcare
providers
should
not
be
(fully) managed by (centralised) bureaucratic
authorities, but must be independent and empowered to deliver the highest
43 Each year, a document is published that compares the healthcare performance of every European
country. Our national policy teams can adapt to changes more easily with their different priorities and
speed. See Health Consumer Powerhouse, Euro Health Consumer Index, available at
https://healthpowerhouse.com/publications/
18


quality of care without governments, politicians, and bureaucrats interfering in
operational decisions. Instead, a variety of organisationally independent
healthcare and insurance providers should enable high-quality healthcare,
where
operational
decisions
are
primarily
made
by
medical/health
professionals with the participation of patients. The state(s) should provide the
necessary conditions for healthcare and insurance providers to operate at a
high level and establish the legal and regulatory framework for healthcare
financing to achieve adequate universal coverage with affordable health care
for all (Bismarck style).44 Given the multiplicity of healthcare systems across the
continent, Volt believes that the optimal public-private coordination and
division of tasks must be determined on a country-by-country and case-by-case
basis.
➢Ensure pan-European coverage of healthcare services to facilitate the
mobility of European citizens by extending existing healthcare agreements (e.g.
by enabling an EU-wide e-booking system for specialised healthcare services
using the European Health Insurance Card (EHIC). Our long-term vision is that
the EHIC would give EU citizens access to all types of healthcare across the EU.
➢Ensure world-class healthcare by enforcing evidence-based guidelines
across Europe.
➢Introduce further harmonisation of prescribing and use of medicine across
countries by the European Medical Agency (EMA). For example, a first priority is
to reduce the large inter-country variation in antibiotic consumption, as the
overuse of antibiotics is increasingly leading to antibiotic resistance.45
B. Access to healthcare
➢Reduce waiting times by introducing e-booking systems for specialists, with
an investment in more specialists and facilities.
➢Create a multi-professional approach by supporting the smart centralisation
of
specialised
medical
specialities.
Medical
centres
should
provide
a
comprehensive point of contact for patients to consult physicians as well as
psychiatrists,
psychologists,
social
counsellors,
speech
therapists,
physiotherapists, and other health professionals. Patients’ medical records
need to be shared easily, but securely and confidentially between different
45 European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, Summary of the latest data on antibiotics
consumption in the European Union, available at
https://ecdc.europa.eu/sites/portal/files/documents/Final_2017_EAAD_ESAC-Net_Summary-edited%2
0-%20FINALwith%20erratum.pdf
44 Especially for larger countries the Bismarck system consistently ranks better in performance than the
Beveridge systems, as described in the Health Consumer Powerhouse, Euro Health Consumer Index
2017, available at https://healthpowerhouse.com/media/EHCI-2017/EHCI-2017-report.pdf
19


healthcare sectors so that healthcare professionals can provide the best
possible treatment to the individual.
○
Physical centralisation is primarily required for rural areas; in urban
areas, centralisation intelligently connects healthcare sectors through
information and communication technologies (ICT).
○
Investments in tele-medicine and e-health are needed to enable efficient
and
patient-friendly
comprehensive
contact
with
healthcare
professionals.
➢Set up a European Health Express for rural areas or areas that do not have
good access to healthcare and invest in new ideas like mobile clinics46 like those
used by the Red Cross or Lifeline Express.47
➢Ensure the provision of mental health care services across Europe.
○
Patients should have quick access to mental healthcare professionals
through their GPs.
○
Mental healthcare should increasingly be performed via innovative
e-health platforms, such as video consultations.
○
Governments should play an active role in promoting mental healthcare.
This would lower the threshold for patients to seek mental healthcare
and eliminate  the stigma attached to mental health problems.
○
Work to eliminate stigma and mystification around mental illnesses like
depression, and provide both early and continued support as well as
preventive measures.
○
Take a comprehensive, “universal and whole -of- society approach” to
mental health based on the World Health Organisation (WHO) Action
Plan.48 State measures to regulate working conditions with respect to
workers’ dignity, work-life balance, working hours, vacation time, and
flexibility. Measures should be taken to inform the workforce, support it
in times of distress, and monitor the enforcement of workplace policies
and guidelines.
➢Ensure sufficient provision of general practitioners and primary care units
in economically disadvantaged areas, especially in rural areas, through better
remuneration for doctors, facilitation of medical services to hard-to-reach areas
through e-health and other measures.
C. Focus on preventive healthcare
To achieve the best health outcomes and quality of life, Volt will focus on preventive
healthcare. Many diseases are the result of long-term exposure to risk factors, some
48 WHO, Comprehensive Mental Health Action Plan 2013-2030, available at
https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240031029
47 The Story of Lifeline Express, The better India, available at
https://www.thebetterindia.com/125248/lifeline-express-world-first-hospital-train-indian-railways/
46 Mobile clinics in Ukraine to bring health services to people in need, WHO Europe, available at
http://www.euro.who.int/en/countries/ukraine/news/news/2014/12/mobile-clinics-in-ukraine-to-bring-
health-services-to-people-in-need
20


of
which
can
be
addressed
through
better
lifestyle choices, cleaner living
environments, and a greater focus on preventive healthcare, especially in the early
years of life. Volt believes that more resources need to be allocated to preventive
healthcare in the following areas:
1. Lifestyle choices and diseases
Across Europe, lifestyle choices contribute significantly to the overall burden of
disease.49 Unhealthy lifestyle habits such as smoking, physical inactivity and poor diet
are some of the main risk factors for disease, which can lead to (chronic) conditions
such as cancer, obesity, diabetes, cardiovascular disease and premature death.
Although people are living longer, they suffer from diseases more often, which has a
negative impact on well-being and further increases healthcare expenditure.
Therefore, promoting preventive lifestyles for both physical and mental/social
well-being should be a focus in schools, companies, and public awareness campaigns.
Regardless of socioeconomic position, all European residents should have access to
first-class preventive healthcare throughout their life cycle.50
➢Encourage healthy living by sharing best practices and limiting access to
harmful and/or addictive substances. All European schools will provide
up-to-date learning tools and practical lessons on lifestyle choices. Additionally,
they will also ensure sufficient time and opportunities for physical activity.
➢Further restrict minors' access to tobacco (i) by imposing an EU-wide ban on
the legal purchase of tobacco products by persons under the age of 18; and (ii)
by improving enforcement of the purchase restrictions (e.g., through sales
licences and fines for vendors and underage buyers).
➢Increase taxation of tobacco products to discourage consumption. WHO
estimates show that more than 8 million deaths are attributed to tobacco each
year, 15% of which through being exposed to second-hand smoke. Increasing
taxes on tobacco products is a tried and tested method of reducing
consumption in spite of risks associated with creating a new informal economy.
51
51 WHO, Tobacco, available at https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/tobacco
50 This includes having access to affordable healthy nutrition.
49 For example, research published in December of 2020 by the WHO Global Health Observatory shows
that, in 2019, 7 out of the 10 top death motivations were due to noncommunicable diseases, where the
world’s biggest killer are ischaemic heart disease and stroke, accounting for almost 9 and over 6 million
people respectively, see WHO, Top 10 causes of death, available at
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/the-top-10-causes-of-death; The Lancet, Life, death
and disability in 2016, available at
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(17)32465-0/fulltext
21


➢Increase taxes on alcohol in combination with other policy measures to
discourage consumption. This is justified by the negative health consequences
of alcohol consumption, including drunken violence.52
➢Set EU guidelines for physical activity in schools and workplaces.53
➢Explore and test tax reforms for healthier diets, including:
○
Increasing value added tax (VAT) on unhealthy foods, including saturated
fats, trans-fats and processed sugars.
○
Decreasing in VAT on healthy vegetables and fruits.
➢Provide European guidelines for educating children in schools about
healthy eating.
➢Standardise or prescribe vaccines against sexually transmitted infections
such
as
the
human
papilloma
virus
and
the
Hepatitis
B
virus
in
government-sponsored vaccination programmes.
➢Make sexually transmitted infection (STI) testing affordable and accessible
to all.
➢Provide European guidelines for immunisation programmes for the elderly.
➢Advocate
for
controlled
decriminalisation
or
legalisation
of
drugs.
Portugal's progressive legislation and attitude towards drug addiction has
shown that the current prevailing model of a “war on drugs” has not and will
not work. Volt intends to emulate the Portuguese model and decriminalise all
drug possession below a certain threshold. This will free up police resources to
prosecute large scale drug smuggling and victimise buyers. It will enable
European societies to treat addiction as a medical rather than a criminal
problem.54
2. Minors should have access to preventive healthcare programs
Early monitoring of health and wellbeing enables effective interventions that have a
positive long-term impact. Parents should be supported to make the best choices
during pregnancy and for their children in terms of physical and mental healthcare,
54 Cata Institute, Drug Decriminalization Policy in Portugal, available at
https://object.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/pubs/pdf/greenwald_whitepaper.pdf
53 People who are insufficiently physically active have a 20% to 30% increased risk of all-cause mortality,
where regular physical activity reduces the risk of cardiovascular disease including high blood pressure,
diabetes. WHO Global Status Report 2010, availble at
http://www.who.int/nmh/publications/ncd_report_full_en.pdf
52 The Lancet, Risk thresholds for alcohol consumption: combined analysis of individual-participant data
for 599 912 current drinkers in 83 prospective studies, available at
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(18)30134-X/fulltext
22


nutrition, exercise and immunisations. Research has shown the importance of early
interventions, and a comprehensive approach to early childhood development to
improve children’s long-term health. 55
➢Implement
and
set
EU-wide
standards
for
high-quality
preventive
healthcare programs for minors. Health programmes should monitor physical
development
as
well
as
psychosocial,
speech,
and
socio-emotional
development through regular check-ups. Through these programmes, parents
should receive the support they need to give their children the best possible
start in life. The measures include:
○
Providing prenatal care that ensures fair and safe conditions for
newborns; regular screening of mothers (e.g. fetal karyotype testing,
ultrasound examinations, substance abuse education).
○
Providing EU-wide guidelines on (i) the timing of preventive lifecycle
screenings and examinations and (ii) the essential procedures/controls
for each screening/examination.
○
Targeted selection of vulnerable minors for additional screenings.
○
Sharing best practices and data between countries to improve national
programmes. Although preventive healthcare programmes for minors
exist in most European countries, health outcomes and access to health
care vary widely across Europe.56
○
Standardising
obligatory
vaccination
programmes
for
minors
in
accordance with European guidelines.
○
Carrying out the neonatal heel prick to detect genetic diseases among
newborns (e.g. hypothyroidism, phenylketonuria, cystic fibrosis).
○
Increasing coverage of preventive healthcare for minors through
measures
such
as
infant
home
visiting
and
school
attendance
programmes.
○
Providing prevention programmes against depression and anxiety to
adolescents, as research has shown it helps reduce the symptoms of
these conditions.57
3. Reduce environmental risks
At the start of the century, global climate change, urban air pollution, and lead
pollution were responsible for nearly 2.4% of diseases and deaths worldwide.58 To
negate the negative impact of those causes over time and hand over a clean and safe
58 WHO, Global Health Risks: Mortality and burden of disease attributable to selected major risks,
available at https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/44203/9789241563871_eng.pdf
57 NCBI, A Meta-Analytic Review of Depression Prevention Programs for Children and Adolescents,
available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2758769/
56 NCBI, Preventive youth health care in 11 European countries: an exploratory analysis, available at
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3359454/
55 Heckman Equation, There’s more to gain by taking a comprehensive approach to early childhood
development, available at
https://heckmanequation.org/resource/invest-in-early-childhood-development-reduce-deficits-strengt
hen-the-economy/
23


future to the next generations, Volt wants to:
➢Monitor key environmental quality indicators (e.g., air pollution using SOx,
NOx, and particulate levels, water quality pH and harmful residual minerals
such as limestone) in real-time to (1) inform citizens, (2) guide policy, and (3)
detect dangerous situations that can lead to diseases such as thyroid carcinoma
and mesothelioma.
➢Take measures to improve air quality in cities, e.g.,
○
Limit traffic on days when certain air quality limits are exceeded, as
already implemented in Spain, Italy, and Denmark, where measures
include (i) prohibiting cars and/or trucks from entering the city or (ii)
restricting access to even or odd number of licence plates.
○
Improve public transportation networks.
○
Support the development of shared means of transport (e.g., car
sharing).
○
Provide environmentally friendly alternatives for transport, e.g., safe and
comprehensive infrastructure for cyclists and pedestrians and bike
sharing.
○
Ensure the affordability of public transport for all.
➢Tighten regulation and controls on industry to minimise harmful emissions.
➢Invest in research on air purification and targeted regeneration of green
spaces and implement pilot projects.
4. Data-driven prevention
Volt believes that better use of data can be a powerful driver of innovation in
healthcare, especially when it comes to better tailoring (preventive) healthcare to the
individual. Volt aims to:
➢Strengthen government agencies in monitoring risk factors based on the
probability of occurrence of medical risk factors, such as diseases in patients, in
different geographic and demographic categories to better target preventive
healthcare to vulnerable subgroups.
➢Use anonymised patient data to set up a trustworthy and secure health
information system where a citizen can opt-in to obtain “recommendation
packages” for screening based on individual characteristics.59 The prompts for
59 The Västerbotten Intervention Programme in Sweden demonstrates the value of individualised
preventive healthcare for cardiovascular disease. The program consists of physical tests, analysis and
one-one-one discussions of the results with a nurse, resulting in changes of lifestyle suggestions that
improve the individual's health condition. See BMC Public Health, A cost-effectiveness analysis of a
community based CVD program in Sweden based on a retrospective register cohort, available at
https://bmcpublichealth.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12889-018-5339-3
24


testing will be communicated through e-health platforms (via apps, smart
devices, etc.) resulting in the following benefits:
○
Improve health outcomes through individualised preventive healthcare.
○
Provide forecasts for incoming test volume to healthcare providers.
○
Reduce waiting time for patients.
○
Track tests by patients to remind them to perform them at the right
time.
➢Tax deductibility of health care expenses for citizens.
➢Monitor
changes
in
the
prevalence
of
chronic
diseases
to support
policy-making in preventive healthcare.
D. Empowering and educating patients
➢EU-wide provision of urgent but non-life-threatening medical assistance
through an on-call service (telephone number 116117.) Callers would receive
medical assistance or an appointment with a specialist over the phone. They
could also be advised whether they should go to a nearby primary care or
emergency care unit. This would alleviate unnecessary pressure on emergency
rooms and first-aid units.
➢Run an EU-wide campaign to inform citizens about the existence and
services of the 116117 telephone number.
➢Raise public awareness of the need for organ donations to increase the
number of donors (e.g. by sending letters for informed-based decision-making
to every citizen turning 18 and by creating a transparent system). Explore a
gradual transition to a system where organ donation is the default option at
the time of death, unless a patient actively chooses to opt-out (not to donate).
➢Prevent
discriminatory
exclusion
of potential blood donors through
unbiased Individual Risk Assessments (IRA). The donation of blood and
blood components enables health care providers in the European Union to
treat trauma or major surgery; treat chronic blood diseases; and produce
medicinal products.60 Although we rely on these voluntary blood donations, the
exclusion criteria introduced to prevent blood donations with transmissible
diseases such as HIV have not been sufficiently updated. As a result, they still
categorically hold back a large population, e.g. parts of the LGBTIQ+ and
commercial sex workers. Current criteria and lengthy deferral periods are often
60European Commission about Blood, available at
https://ec.europa.eu/health/blood_tissues_organs/blood_en
25


discriminatory and have led to non-compliance.61 In line with Article 21 of the
EU Charter of Fundamental Rights about non-discrimination62, Volt calls for
blood donation on an IRA that is independent of sex, gender, and sexual
orientation, similar to that used in Italy since 2001 without having any
measurable impact on the HIV epidemic.63 We want the IRA to consist of a
questionnaire followed by a personal interview with a medical professional.
Following international safety standards, we demand a deferral period after
risky behaviour that does not exceed three months64.
➢Harmonisation of information and guidelines on lifestyle choices leads to
lifestyle diseases based on the latest scientific evidence.
E. Ageing populations
1. Healthcare for the elderly
Across
Europe,
we need to find solutions to challenges posed by shifting
demographics65 in healthcare. As life expectancy increases, so does the incidence of
illness among older people, leading to an increasing need for nursing and medical care
in this segment. While many older people find support in assisted living facilities and
nursing homes as they age, autonomy and self-determination, which remain important
components of a decent quality of life, may still be compromised. Although advances
in medical technology have led to spectacular increases in life expectancy, quality of
life is often not adequately considered in medical interventions. Volt aims to address
this:
➢Improve the quality of life and (long-term) care for older people by
expanding access to assisted living programs, such as Buurtzorg in the
Netherlands, where self-managed teams flexibly arrange the best care that
fits the individual patient, and other similar programs.66
66 The Guardian, Buurtzorg: the Dutch model of neighbourhood care that is going global, available at
https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2017/may/09/buurtzorg-dutch-model-neighbourho
od-care; For further suggestions on how to improve long-term care for older people also see Interlinks,
65 European Commission, Population structure and ageing, available at
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Population_structure_and_ageing
64See above: Sturrock BR, Mucklow S. Clin Med (Lond). 2018.
63 Suligoi B, Pupella S, Regine V, Raimondo M, Velati C, Grazzini G. Changing blood donor screening
criteria from permanent deferral for men who have sex with men to individual sexual risk assessment:
no evidence of a significant impact on the human immunodeficiency virus epidemic in Italy. Blood
Transfus. 2013;11(3):441-448. available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3729137/
62
Article
21,
EU
Charter
of
Fundamental
Rights
available
at
https://fra.europa.eu/en/eu
charter/article/21-non-discrimination
61 Sturrock BR, Mucklow S., What is the evidence for the change in the blood -donation deferral period
for
high-risk groups and does it go far enough?. Clin Med (Lond). 2018;18(4):304-307. available at
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6334046/ -
26


➢Education and training of medical students, specialists, and other health
professionals
to
facilitate
decision-making
processes
about
possible
treatments with patient participation, with the intention of improving or
maintaining quality of life. This is particularly relevant for patients with
complex co-morbidities and at the end of life.
➢Ensure the provision of palliative care in the home environment at the end of
life.
2. Supporting fertility and childcare
A steady trend of declining fertility can be observed across Europe. Over the period
from 1961–2015, the highest annual number of live births in the EU-28 was recorded
in 1964, at 7.8 million. Since then, the number of live births in the EU-28 has declined,
reaching a low of 5.0 million in 2002.67
➢Ensure that parents have access to affordable childcare so that an individual
work-life balance can be achieved.
➢Guarantee
a
high,
Europe-wide
standard
for
equally-paid
parental,
paternity, and maternity leave. Either one parent or both take parental leave
after maternity and paternity leave.
The length of leave can be decided
according to the countries’ existing frameworks, while ensuring gender
equality68, but should be a minimum of 26 weeks and may be taken either
consecutively (which the employer cannot refuse) or at irregular intervals
(which the employer can refuse). Additional time off should be shared
according to the parents' preferences, providing substantive incentives for
both parents to take parental leave.69 Similar to maternity and paternity
allowance, parental allowance is equivalent to earned income.70
F. Innovation and research
➢Invest in e-health programmes to promote healthcare coverage, flexibility and
efficiency of healthcare provision, and research focused on advanced medical
data analytics. Volt wants to:
70 For more details, see Social Equality, Protect the human and civil rights of groups and minorities,
Protect the human and civil rights of women, In the workplace
69 ​This also applies to same-sex couples. Single parents can either choose to take the full time off
(otherwise available to both parents) or to be awarded financial benefits.
68 For more details see End discrimination against groups and minorities, End discrimination against
women, In the workplace
67 Eurostat, Fertility Statistics, available at
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Fertility_statistics
available at http://interlinks.euro.centre.org/project. These programmes are also meant to improve the
situation of formal and informal caregivers, while taking into accounts gendered aspects of care.
27


○
Implement e-booking systems to avoid costly waiting lists.71
○
Improve telemedical networks to improve access to (i) healthcare in
remote areas and (ii) consultations with specialists. The latter should be
provided, especially for patients with complex conditions and a high
degree of comorbidity that may complicate travel or lead to a sudden
need for a specialist.
○
Use e-health to connect a patient’s prescriptions to the European Health
Insurance Card (EHIC). Prescriptions loaded on the EHIC should allow
people to obtain prescription medicines from any pharmacy in the EU,
improving access to medicines.
○
Provide opt-in options to load (i) patient diagnoses and/or medical
records, (ii) organ-donation preferences, and (iii) living wills into the EHIC
to improve healthcare tailored to the individual.
○
Invest in standardised secure digital patient records (1) for data
collection to increase the efficiency of healthcare and (2) to enable
innovative
big-data research based on anonymised General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR)-compliant patient records.
○
Increase funding for modernisation and digitisation to facilitate medical
workflows in hospitals and medical institutions.
➢Invest in medical research by:
○
Increase funding for national and transnational publicly ­owned research
organisations and found a new publicly owned European research centre
with an explicit focus on biomedical research, loosely modelled on the
National Institute of Health (USA).72 This research centre will enable
cutting-edge research to be carried out on a scale that is not necessarily
supported by national laboratories or cannot be risked by private
companies. Thus, the research centre is designed to empower Europe as
a daring and pioneering region in the field of medical research, thereby
strengthening the competitiveness of European life sciences companies
by promoting innovation.
○
Promote evidence-based medicine by investing in the development and
implementation of standardised European guidelines73 for the treatment
and diagnostics of diseases in order to harmonise the quality of
healthcare across Europe.
73 For example: C. O’Mahony et al., Effectiveness of the 2014 European Society of Cardiology guideline
on sudden cardiac death in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a systematic review and meta-analysis,
available at https://heart.bmj.com/content/early/2018/10/26/heartjnl-2018-313700
Polverino et al., European Respiratory Society guidelines for the management of adult bronchiectasis,
available
at
http://erj.ersjournals.com/content/50/3/1700629.
See
also
Alignment
of European
healthcare systems
72 National Institutes of Health, home, available at https://www.nih.gov/
71 In 2014 Macedonia managed to almost eliminate its waiting  lists by implementing a real-time
e-booking system as described in the Euro Health Consumer Index 2017. See WHO Europe, Integrated
health information system, available at
http://www.euro.who.int/en/countries/the-former-yugoslav-republic-of-macedonia/news/news/2015/0
5/towards-an-integrated-health-information-system-in-the-former-yugoslav-republic-of-macedonia
28


○
Incentivise research in areas of public interest with low economic
potential, such as new antibiotics,74 treatments for rare diseases,75 and
vaccines.76
○
Invest in individualised medicine using high-throughput techniques (DNA
sequencing, micro-arrays, mass spectrometry, etc.) to investigate ways of
improving both preventive and curative healthcare by using individual
genetic, physiological, and biochemical characteristics while integrating
behavioural aspects such as physical activity and nutrition. Key issues for
the successful implementation of these techniques include: (i) reducing
the cost and increasing the quality of measurement technologies; (ii)
developing the necessary bioinformatics, computational and statistical
methods to integrate the volumes of data masses generated by these
measurement
techniques;77
(iii)
providing
funding
for
long-term
academic research projects and/or agendas relevant to high-throughput
techniques and medical applications; and (iv) ensuring the ethical
handling of the data and procedures,78 including absolute privacy and
security of patient data.
○
Incentivise
the
publication
of
null­-results
while
improving
the
transparency of research projects and their statistical analyses79 through
standardised reporting criteria,80 pre-defined analyses plans, and, where
compatible with data protection rules, the publication of the raw data.81
➢Create regulations for more sustainable packaging of medicine using
renewable resources and less plastic.
G. Healthcare professionals
1. Nurses
➢Promote home care networks that link a patient’s existing community to a
local team of nursing professionals who then work with that community to
81 See for example: Nature Journal, Scientific Data, available at https://www.nature.com/sdata/
80 For example: European Commission, European guidelines on clinical trials, available at
ttps://ec.europa.eu/health/human-use/clinical-trials_en
79 J. P A. Ioannidis, Why Most Published Research Findings Are False, available at
https://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/article?id=10.1371/journal.pmed.0020124
78 M. Langanke et al., Comparing different scientific approaches to personalized medicine: research
ethics and privacy protection, pg 437–444, available at
https://www.futuremedicine.com/doi/10.2217/pme.11.34
77 S. Huang, K. Chaudhary, L. X. Garmire, More Is Better: Recent Progress in Multi-Omics Data
Integration Methods, available at https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fgene.2017.00084/full
76 C. Sheridan, Vaccine market boosters, pg 499–501, available at
https://www.nature.com/articles/nbt0609-499
75 L. Luzzatto et al., Rare diseases and effective treatments: are we delivering?, pg 750–752, available at
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0140673615602975
74 C. Kållberg et al., Introduction and geographic availability of new antibiotics approved between 1999
and 2014, available at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0205166
29


tailor support to the patient‘s needs, following the example of Buurtzorg
Netherlands.82
➢Strengthen the independence and attractiveness of the nursing profession
as a more independent and attractive field by promoting small, self-managed
teams.
➢Introduction of nursing assistants to help patients in their daily hospital life,
in addition to nurses attending to prescribed medical needs, as is the case in
the United States, the United Kingdom, and Denmark.
➢Encourage the unionisation of nurses and nursing assistants so that their
voices can be heard.
2. Doctors/general
➢Harmonise
accreditation
schemes
across
Europe
and
review
entry
requirements for studies (e.g. reward social engagement skills and introduce
special exams as in Austria83 to prevent high drop-out rates and gain the
necessary qualifications).
➢Incentivise and encourage participation in European exchange programmes
during studies and work for all healthcare professionals.
➢Allow for flexible working hours, part-time jobs and a family-friendly working
environment.
3. Midwives
➢Review insurance costs for midwives.
➢Support self-organised projects designed to efficiently connect pregnant
women to midwives, both pre-and postnatally (e.g. through apps with online
chats during pregnancy and in the first months after birth).
H. Healthcare expenditures and efficiency
Over the past few decades, most countries have experienced a steady increase in
healthcare expenditures. By 2020, the EU average has grown to 8% of Member States'
GDP, with spending ranges between 4.8% of GDP in Latvia and 9.2% of GDP in Czechia
83 Medical University of Vienna, Medicine and Dentistry Admission Test, available at
https://www.meduniwien.ac.at/web/en/studies-further-education/application-admission/medicine-and
-dentistry-degree/admissions-test/
82 For best practice for neighbourhood care see Buurtzorg Nederland, Humany over bureaucracy,
available at https://www.buurtzorg.com/
30


and Austria..84 After the economic crisis, direct out-of-pocket spending on healthcare
has increased faster than public spending on healthcare. This trend is making
healthcare more expensive for consumers and could pose a serious long-term threat
in terms of affordability for all European citizens. Volt believes governments should
keep healthcare affordable and therefore both avoid cuts to overall healthcare
spending and increase funding to programmes that aim to reduce the overall cost of
healthcare in general, such as preventive medicine initiatives. Volt also promotes the
efficient use of resources and best-cost-benefit policies. To this end, Volt aims to:
➢Reduce costs by establishing a legal and regulatory framework that allows
healthcare professionals to flexibly provide the best care for individual
patients in small self-governing teams, e.g., the Buurtzorg model in the
Netherlands.85
➢Ensure the efficient and safe use and supply of medicines by:
○
Providing medicine in individualised packages and quantities according
to patients’ needs instead of standard packages that often result in large
quantities of unused medicine and waste.
○
Coordinating negotiations with the pharmaceutical industry at European
level to reduce costs.
○
Reducing waste of drugs by better allocating nearly expired medicines
to regions where they are currently needed through a Europe-wide
marketplace.
➢Create incentives for physicians and health professionals to provide more
preventive
healthcare services to avoid “downstream costs”. Incentive
schemes need to be set individually for each country to suit the respective
health (financing) system.
I. Sexual and reproductive health and rights
➢Make abortion accessible and affordable for all women86 and ensure that
women have access to contraception.87 Approach sexual and reproductive
health and rights holistically as a key issue of gender equality and health.
➢Ensure that schools introduce accurate obligatory teaching on reproductive
health and rights so that there is a European standard for curricula that
schools comply with.
87 For more details see Social Equality, Own your body, Reproductive rights
86 For more details see Social Equality, Own your body, Reproductive rights
85 The Guardian, Buurtzorg: the Dutch model of neighbourhood care that is going global, available at
https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2017/may/09/buurtzorg-dutch-model-neighbourho
od-care; Ernst & Young documented estimated savings of around 50% to healthcare services provided
by Buurtzorg due to the implementation of community care programs that significantly reduced the
required hours of care. See Buurtzorg, About Us, available at https://www.buurtzorg.com/about-us/
84 Eurostatm Government expenditure on health, available at
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/SEPDF/cache/42733.pdf
31


J. Options and rights in pregnancy and birth
Despite the recommendations of the World Health Organisation (WHO)88, an alarming
rate of unnecessary medical interventions89 90 91 are performed on low-risk births. In
most cases, these interventions prove dehumanising for the women involved, who
perceive a “baby-factory” environment that reflects a society focused on productivity
rather than respect.
Maternity is one of the most important and impactful moments in a person's life. The
Humanization of Birth is a concept that focuses on the mother’s needs and away from
(but not excluding) midwives and other medical professionals. All efforts should be
directed towards providing mothers with the scientific and legal information they
need to make the best possible choices when giving birth to their child. The rights of
partners and close family members should also be highly considered.
➢Ensure that the World Health Organisation (WHO) recommendations on
humanising childbirth are followed.
o
Ensure that medical consultation, treatment, and childbirth respect
human rights and dignity.
o
Call on the ministries responsible for health and gender equality to
collect data on medical interventions during childbirth and on cases of
gynaecological and obstetrical violence, and to conduct and publish
studies on this topic.
o
Disseminate the best practices promoted by WHO and invite national
medical associations to discuss this issue and make recommendations on
the prevention of gynaecological and obstetrical violence, in particular
through a commission to promote a caring approach in gynaecology.
o
Conduct information and awareness-raising campaigns on patients’
rights and on preventing and combating sexism and violence against
women, including gynaecological and obstetric violence.
o
Adopt and implement legislation on patients’ informed consent and
their right to information at the different stages of medical procedures,
where this has not already been done.
91 WHO recommendations for induction of labour, available at:
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/44531/9789241501156_eng.pdf
90 WHO statement on caesarean section rates, available at:
https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/161442/WHO_RHR_15.02_eng.pdf
89 Health at a Glance 2019, OECD Indicators, available at:
https://www.oecd.org/health/health-systems/health-at-a-glance-19991312.htm
88 WHO recommendations Intrapartum care for a positive childbirth experience, available at:
https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/272447/WHO-RHR-18.12-eng.pdf
32


o
Ensure adequate funding for healthcare facilities to provide decent
working conditions for nurses, respectful and caring treatment of
patients and women in labour, and access to pain relief.
o
Provide specific training for obstetricians and gynaecologists and raise
awareness of gynaecological and obstetric violence as part of this
training.
o
Ensure that the training of doctors, midwives, and nurses pays particular
attention to the relationship between care providers and patients; the
concept of informed consent; gender equality; the inclusion of LGBTIQ+
people, persons with disabilities, and vulnerable people; communication;
the prevention of sexism and violence; and the promotion of a humane
care approach.
o
Propose specific and accessible reporting and complaint mechanisms for
victims of gynaecological and obstetrical violence inside and outside
hospitals, including with ombudsperson services.
o
Provide for a mechanism to investigate complaints about gynaecological
and obstetrical violence to the exclusion of any mediation and, if this is
not
already
the
case,
provide
for
sanctions
against
healthcare
professionals if a complaint about this type of violence is proven.
o
Offer a support service for victims of gynaecological and obstetrical
violence and ensure that they receive care.
o
Signature, ratification, and implementation of the Istanbul Convention
by those states that have not yet done so.92
o
Allow a second companion, appointed by the couple, to assist during
childbirth.
o
If there are no medical reasons not to do so, structures should be put in
place to enable the accompanying person to be present and to provide
her with emotional support during the pregnancy hospitalisation.
o
Increase the availability of water births in public health systems93.
o
Make birth plans mandatory in which the pregnant woman and medical
professionals discuss and determine the further procedures during
childbirth.
o
Allow the mother to choose the health professionals to support her
during pregnancy, labour, childbirth, and the postpartum period.
o
Assure that women’s rights are respected, even during pregnancy,
labour, childbirth and postpartum period.
o
Incentivise the implementation of birth centres or birth houses in the
public health system.
93 Immersion in Water During Labour and Birth (RCOG/Royal College of Midwives Joint Statement No.
1), Published on Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, available at:
http://www.rcog.org.uk
92 Obstetrical and gynaecological violence, available at:
http://assembly.coe.int/nw/xml/XRef/Xref-XML2HTML-en.asp?fileid=28236&lang=en
33


34


V.
Ensure
a
fair
legal
system,
effective
law
enforcement, and anti-corruption legislation
Volt wants ‘smart’ European States to ensure frictionless access to human, fair,
transparent,
accountable,
and
efficient legal systems and law enforcement
agencies.
Volt also has a zero-tolerance policy towards corruption. State capture, when
private interests dictate state policy; white collar crime; and corporate tax
avoidance. These actions are incompatible with European values and result in
significant waste of public and private resources.
To achieve this goal, it is necessary, but non-exhaustive, to do the following: (1)
reform and strengthen the judicial system; (2) combat white-collar (corporate and
financial) crime; and (3) regulate, protect, and incentivise whistleblowing. In addition,
law enforcement needs to be improved and limited to regulating state-of-emergency
extensions and ending police violence (prosecution and police operations), and
sanctions outside the penal system must be prioritised.
If not addressed, corruption can become systemic, and in Europe it is most often
associated with illiberal models of state capture. Globally, corruption has become
increasingly critical as an endemic part of the global economy. Studies have found that
there is anywhere between 21-32 trillion euros of unpaid taxes94 hidden in tax havens
around the world. Ending corruption and tax avoidance is absolutely critical. With
growing inequalities leading to political instability and an urgent need to tackle other
pressing global issues.
A. Intelligent judicial systems
➢Reduce backlog of pending cases by applying simple standards (e.g., focusing
on first-in-first-out and urgent cases).
➢Develop alternative routes to litigation, e.g., mediation and negotiation, in
areas such as family law.
➢Encourage the digitisation of proceedings for civil lawsuits below a certain
amount in dispute and use digital means to help defendants keep up with their
court dates, etc.
➢Expand legal aid services in all Member States to provide effective access
to justice, particularly to the most vulnerable and marginalised populations.
94 Tax Justice Network, Tax avoidance and evasion - The scale of the problem, available at
https://www.taxjustice.net/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/Tax-dodging-the-scale-of-the-problem-TJN-Br
iefing.pdf
35


B. Fighting corruption
➢Confer additional powers to the European anti-corruption office OLAF and
the European Ombudsman, as well as the new European Public Prosecutor's
Office. The European institutions will be held accountable by the European
Commission Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF), and the Member States will be
controlled by their respective anti-corruption institutions. Corruption needs to
be controlled by an external actor to the government in question. Therefore,
OLAF and the newly created European Public Prosecutor's Office (EPPO)
should be given additional powers to investigate cases of corruption in Member
States, including the ability to access documents and conduct interviews in
cooperation with the European Prosecutor in charge of the fight against
corruption. Membership in the EPPO, which can only be established in the
context of enhanced cooperation, should be mandatory in order to receive EU
funding over and beyond the budget. OLAF should also have the right to bring
cases to a national court if necessary.
➢Expand the European Transparency Register95 to all EU institutions, including
the Commission and the Council, and make it mandatory for all lobbying and
advocacy organisations to be listed therein. Apply the same register system at
all levels of government in the Member States.
➢Effectively
tackle
the
phenomenon
of
“revolving
doors”
between
governments and EU institutions, in line with Transparency International’s
recommendations.96 Measures include substantial “cooling off” periods for civil
servants and elected officials leaving their positions and taking on a role
involving profit-oriented advocacy or lobbying for their former institutions.
Institutional ethics committees must be established or reinforced and given
credible, legally binding powers to prevent conflicts of interest after leaving
public service, under stricter ethics guidelines. The recent Barroso & Goldman
Sachs scandal must not be repeated.
➢Ensure that opportunities for abuse of power by state actors are limited by
requiring the transparency of public expenditure. We will promote the
implementation
of
e-governance and e-procurement initiatives to stop
bureaucratic corruption. These changes must be made to accelerate the
digitisation of state institutions and to make transparent both the decisions
taken by state institutions and interactions with companies they contract with.
Any decision requiring public expenditure must be made fully accessible to the
press and the constituents of the respective Member State. To accommodate
this, Volt proposes to:
96 TI report, Access All Areas, available at
http://transparency.eu/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/Access-all-areas.pdf
95 European Commission, Transparency Register, avaliable at
http://ec.europa.eu/transparencyregister/public/homePage.do
36


○
Use digital infrastructure to streamline and promote transparency of
decisions made by state institutions and their contractors to ensure
accountability.
○
Oblige
Member
States
to
advance
the
digitisation
of
their
administration. In the case of non-compliance, EU funding will be cut to
incentivise this commitment.
○
Allocate EU funds to support the development of infrastructure for such
initiatives and to retrain civil servants to work with e-Government tools.
➢Lead by example on the transparency of party financing. Political parties, as
well as individuals in government, receive illicit funding. Therefore, Volt will
publish online the identity of all relevant donors and the amount donated. We
will also introduce a code of conduct that regulates what kinds of donations
Volt is allowed to accept.
➢Introduce requirements for full disclosure of the office costs and expenses
by elected officials in carrying out their work, including members of national
and European Parliaments, modelled on the procedures already followed by
certain groups of MEPs.
➢Expand the implementation of Integrity Pacts and clean contracts in public
procurement and public-private partnership together with civil society, in line
with best practices recommended by Transparency International.97
C. Ending tax avoidance and evasion and increasing tax
collection efficiency
➢Support the urgent implementation of the OECD/G20 Base Erosion Profit
Shifting Actions (BEPS) project to ensure that profits are taxed in the region
where the economic activities generating the profits are performed and where
value creation takes place.98
➢Push
for
the
full
adoption
and
implementation
of
the
Common
Consolidated Corporate Tax Base (CCCTB) proposal endorsed by the
European Parliament in March 2018.99 Multinational online companies must be
taxed for their “digital presence” and value generated in a country.
99 European Parliament, MEPs approve tax plan, available at
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/press-room/20180309IPR99422/meps-approve-new-eu-corpo
rate-tax-plan-which-embraces-digital-presence; European Parliament Research Service briefing,
available at
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/BRIE/2017/599395/EPRS_BRI(2017)599395_EN.pdf
98 OECD, BEPS Actions, available at www.oecd.org/ctp/beps-actions.htm
97For more information see EU Reform chapter, security. Transparency International, Integrity Pacts,
available at https://www.transparency.org/whatwedo/tools/integrity_pacts/3
37


➢Establish an EU tax authority to combat cross-border tax avoidance and
evasion.
○
Ban “letterbox”100 companies that allow multinationals to create empty
registrations in countries for tax purposes and ban “sweetheart”
discriminatory tax deals between governments and multinationals.
○
Shed light on and create transparency in company ownership structures
by requiring the disclosure of personal data of the owners and
beneficiaries of companies in the public register.
➢Push for administrative reforms across Europe at all levels of government
to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of tax collection and abolish tax
havens and tax loopholes in the EU.
D. Corporate social responsibility and accountability
Thoroughly prosecute political, economic, and financial crimes and support initiatives
to expand corporate social responsibility, ensure compliance, and ethical standards.
Strengthen whistle-blowing protection and extend due diligence to the entire value
chain.
➢Reinforce the newly created European Public Prosecutor's Office and
encourage the development of public prosecutors specialising in economic
and financial crime in countries where they do not yet exist.
➢Support the protection, anonymity, and remuneration for whistleblowers
who disclose information for the benefit of the public.
➢Advocate for international standards on corporate responsibility, including
the UN Compact and the new Binding Treaty on Business and Human Rights.
➢Put in place legislation that extends responsible practices and due diligence
throughout the supply chains.
E. Law enforcement and police operations
➢Strengthen European police cooperation, define state of emergency limits,
and ensure that police forces operate in a fair and effective manner while
reducing violence and eliminating discriminatory practices.
➢Limit the duration of the state of emergency; ensure full and transparent
monitoring of human rights during the emergency period; and establish stricter
review mechanisms to ensure that such measures are truly necessary.
100 ETUC, Letterbox-type practices, available at
https://www.etuc.org/press/letterbox-type-practices-avoiding-taxes-and-exploiting-workers-across-eu
38


➢Promote
the
work
of
Europol
and
Eurojust, accelerate and support
integration, and ensure respect for human rights.101
➢End ethnic profiling during police identity checks and require officers to issue
a stop form for every identity check.102
➢Limit the discretion of officers by requiring reasonable and specific suspicion
for all checks and searches.103
➢End
police
violence
through
training,
accountability
mechanisms
and
monitoring.104
➢Limit the use of military-st police actions to street protests and local
conflicts.
➢Expand training of police forces in dealing with hate crimes.105
F. Prison reform
➢Ensure that prison conditions always comply with human rights and dignity
regulations in accordance with Council of Europe standards and that
administrative powers are not used in a discriminatory manner. Also, ensure
that prisons are as close as possible to the outside world to facilitate
reintegration and inclusion.
➢Encourage research into alternatives to prisons that both ensure the safety
of society and enable the successful reintegration of individuals into it through
the promotion of courses and activities, as well as reintegration into society.
➢Prioritise alternative sanctions (other than prison, e.g., community service)
for certain non-violent crimes.
105 See, for example, Council of Europe, Policing Hate Crime against LGBTI persons: Training for a
Professional Police Response, available at
https://rm.coe.int/prems-030717-gbr-2575-hate-crimes-against-lgbti-web-a4/1680723b1d
104 For more details see Social Equality, Protect the human and civil rights of groups and minorities,
Protect the human and civil rights with regards to ethnicity, national origin, descent and skin colour, In
the law
103 For more details see Social Equality, Protect the human and civil rights of groups and minorities,
Protect the human and civil rights with regards to ethnicity, national origin, descent and skin colour, In
the law
102 For more details see Social Equality, Protect the human and civil rights of groups and minorities,
Protect the human and civil rights with regards to ethnicity, national origin, descent and skin colour, In
the law
101 For more details see Other provisions for good governance, Military & non-military capabilities and
Common security culture
39


➢Offer
psychological
treatment
and/or
psychotherapy
to
prisoners,
especially those suffering from attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
in combination with substance abuse,106 including alternative treatments like
meditation and mindfulness.
➢Ensure that juveniles are not detained with adults.
➢Develop an education system that serves both short- and long-term
offenders. The curriculum should be varied, with particular emphasis on
supplementing.
➢Ensure that prisoners undergoing strip searches are searched by same-sex
officers. For certain inmates subject to strict religious or cultural obligations,
all necessary precautions and measures must be taken not to cross sensitive
boundaries. Officers must be aware of these requests in advance.
➢Provide cultural training for prison officers. All staff should be trained to
learn the techniques needed to work with multi-ethnic prison communities. A
basic program should be implemented across the board. A more intensive
cultural education program could greatly improve inmate-officer relations.
106 Overall, 51.4% of male young adult offenders and 43.6% of female offenders had a child psychiatric
history. The population-attributable risk of criminality from childhood disorders was 20.6% for young
adult female participants and 15.3% for male participants. See NCBI, Childhood psychiatric disorders
and young adult crime, available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17974931
40


VI.
Guarantee digital rights and freedom
In a society that is shaped by technology and connectivity, our online rights are
essential to our democracy. Volt will work to guarantee citizens’ rights on the internet
and to enhance digital literacy and technological competence. Our freedom of
expression and our economic, social, and cultural rights depend on our ability to
engage with technology. Volt will create a new type of policy and provide a forum to
debate our common future with new technologies.
A. Internet access
➢Push the European Union and European countries to invest more to ensure
high-quality internet connectivity across Europe.107 This includes the fastest
available mobile network connections and WiFi in urban and rural areas, the
most marginalised communities on the internet. The economic benefits of
widespread connectivity should be encouraged, while ensuring that provision is
equitable, fair, and universal as a merit good or public good.
B. Digital education
➢Foster the accessibility to teaching of digital technological skills for all
ages
whilst
focusing on Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and
Mathematics (STEAM). Online education must begin at an early age and
progress toward life-long learning and vocational training, including an
emphasis on mental health and social well-being given the impact of the digital
environment.
➢Promote investment in lifelong adult education programmes with a focus
on occupational training. As more and more jobs become redundant due to
automation, more and more people will need to be retrained to work in new
roles or to use new technologies. Digital literacy will therefore become
increasingly
important
and
require
greater
investment.
Occupational
competence, or the idea that people should be able to develop their own
interests when they have access to information and technology, should be part
of a person’s development throughout their life.
C. Digital single market
107 European Commission, Connectivity for a European Gigabit Society, available at
https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/connectivity-european-gigabit-society-brochure
41


➢Prioritise developing the digital single market so that companies and
start-ups can take advantage of the 500 million consumers and the economies
of scale that come with it, while also working with the EU and other European
countries. New online forms of organisations must be taken into account, as
well as the potential of alternative business models such as cooperatives and
mutual societies.
D. Digital rights
➢Push for a Digital Bill of Rights as a binding international legal instrument
based
on
existing
internet
governance
norms.108 To the extent that
connectivity enables citizens to participate in society, this instrument would
guarantee individual and social rights in a connected world, including the right
to access the internet, and it would also protect related rights in the digital
environment, such as privacy, data protection, freedom of expression,
information
and
association
online,
and
stakeholder-based
internet
governance. The principles of Net Neutrality and an open internet are at the
core of an internet system that guarantees these rights. Volt will advocate for
the EU to include digital rights and freedoms in its agreements with third
countries.
➢Support and expand privacy and data protection, building on the General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR).109 Encryption is key to ensuring online
privacy. Volt will work to promote encryption of online communications. While
effective protection against terrorist and criminal threats is critical, citizens
must never accept mass surveillance as the norm, whether carried out by state
or non-state actors.
➢Advance and protect cybersecurity and digital rights as new revolutionary
technologies emerge in the coming era of the Internet of Things (IoT),110 where
smart grids, smart roads, smart hospitals, and even smart furniture will
determine crucial aspects of our lives.
➢Ensure that the principle of an open internet and freedom of expression,
access, and information are compatible with the rights of authors and
creators. We need to strike a balance between fair rewards and incentives for
individual creators and sustainable creative industries with widespread access
for consumers. Writers, composers, and other creators must be fairly
110 The Guardian, Rise of the Machines, available at
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jun/06/internet-of-things-smart-home-smart-city
109 European Commission, EU Data Protection Rules, available at
https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/law-topic/data-protection/eu-data-protection-rules_en
108 IGF, The Charter of Human Rights and Principles for the Internet, available at
http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/Opinion/Communications/InternetPrinciplesAndRightsCoaliti
on.pdf
42


compensated for their work, without overly limiting users’ access to and
freedom of information on the internet.
E. Security and Safety
➢Ensure the security of the internet by fighting organised crime and security
threats, and guaranteeing global resilience against cyber attacks by non-state
and state actors. This must be done through greater security cooperation
between law enforcement authorities and online platforms, companies, and EU
bodies such as EUROPOL and EUIPO.111 Further measures must also be taken to
combat online intimidation and harassment and their social implications,
working together with online platforms and civil society groups.
➢Combat cyber-attacks, disinformation campaigns, and media sabotage.
➢Work with global technology and social media companies (e.g. Facebook,
Twitter and YouTube) to fight extremism in all its forms.
➢Hold social media companies accountable for spreading misinformation like
any other media platform.
➢Ensure that EU citizens’ data stored internationally is handled strictly in
accordance with European standards and is fully protected.
➢Pool
European efforts and resources for cyber defence. Shift some
resources from traditional military expenditure - such as personnel - to
research and development (R&D) to develop European security know-how.112
➢Modernise the EU’s strategic communication campaigns to reflect the
changing technological environment in the information age in order to
effectively compete and defeat violent extremist propaganda campaigns.
F. Ethical approach
➢Commit to an ethical, inclusive, rights-based approach to technological
development. Technological progress should be based on the principle of
fairness, whereby the benefits of an innovation should be measured by the
extent to which it benefits the most vulnerables which is an important social
criterion.
112 For more details see EU Reform, External security and defence policy reform, Military & non-military
capabilities
111 European Observatory on Infringements of Intellectual Property Rights, available at
https://euipo.europa.eu/ohimportal/en/web/observatory/about-us
43


➢Building a new political culture and vocabulary capable of debating and
addressing new issues as they arise. As technological progress accelerates,
we will soon be confronted with issues that today we still consider far-fetched
and unimaginable as technologies like artificial intelligence (AI) and the
Internet of Things (IoT) develop.
44


VII.
Open-Source Solutions
A. Open-Source Software (FLOSS)
In the age of digital innovation, we must protect the safety and resiliency of the EU’s
digital infrastructure by allowing an ecosystem of FLOSS (free/libre and open source
software, a form of software that allows users the freedom to use, adapt, and
redistribute the source code of software applications without having to pay a licence
fee) providers that drive innovation in a market that favours monopolies because
revenues are not diminishing. To this end, we should encourage the replacement of
proprietary software with open source solutions in public administration to create a
transparent structure that reduces the risk of data breaches, unauthorised data use,
and dependence on proprietary providers. To facilitate this, Volt will:
➢Actively push for the introduction of a directive mandating EU services and
institutions to migrate to FLOSS software.
○
Create a platform for FLOSS software for public administration and
mandate public officials to assess available solutions on the platform in
terms of scope and cost, following the examples of implementation in
Brazil113
114, Canada115, and Italy116, before opting for proprietary
software.
○
Create a level playing field between research initiatives, communities,
NGOs, and private companies publishing FLOSS solutions by investing in
visibility and budgetary assistance.
○
Designate publishers as service providers in FLOSS-based public tenders.
○
Recommend adoption at a national level and raise awareness of the
advantages of FLOSS software compared to proprietary solutions.
○
Assess the preferred systems from a security perspective, develop
community-based
EU
security
initiatives,117
and
evaluate
their
user-friendliness and accessibility.
○
Maintain a catalogue of implementations (use cases) showing how the
solutions are used in which context to quickly assess the available
systems, their data analysis capabilities, their accessibility, and their
requirements.
117 Joinup, EU-Free and Open Source Software Auditing Community, available at
https://joinup.ec.europa.eu/collection/eu-fossa-2
116 Adarsh Verma, Italian military adopts Open Source LibreOffice and saves 29 million, available at
http://fossbytes.com/italian-military-adopts-open-source-libreoffice-and-saves-29-million/
115 Government of Canada, Directive on Management of Information Technology, available at
https://www.tbs-sct.gc.ca/pol/doc-eng.aspx?id=15249
114 Andy Oram, Open Source in Brazil, available at https://www.oreilly.com/ideas/open-source-in-brazil
113 Ministério do planejamento, Software Público Brasileiro, available at https://softwarepublico.gov.br/
45


➢Push for a bottom-up approach and empower public sector employees
through
basic
software
development
training
to
move
from
use
to
understanding.
○
Start the transition from being able to use a solution to understanding
how it actually works, creating the capacity to request enhancements for
specific and evolving administrative needs.
○
Develop uniform and standardised requirements specifications and
centrally controlled change management to establish common use
patterns across all disciplines and a more homogeneous software
ecosystem.
➢Define
standards
for
administrative
software
solutions
that
allow
interoperability of different systems across departments and borders.
○
Promote the adoption of existing FLOSS platforms in the EU institutions
and facilitate the standardisation of software development according to
the ISA directives118, with a particular focus on adapting the European
Interoperability
Reference
Architecture
(EIRA)119
for
technically,
bureaucratically, and legally interoperable development.
○
Follow
best
practices120
and
move
FLOSS
projects
for
public
administration software to publicly accessible platforms for code
publication. Examples of such platforms include Gitlab and Github, but
ideally this would be done on a new European platform that explicitly
aims to foster collaboration between public administration developers,
contributors, and users, and takes more of a collaborative approach to
development121.
○
Emphasise on reliable and consistent data governance, including the
management of data definitions in all EU languages.
121 Joshua Tauberer, How I changed the law with a GitHub pull request, available at
https://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2018/11/how-i-changed-the-law-with-a-github-pull-request/
120 GitHub, National Security Agency, available at https://github.com/NationalSecurityAgency
119 EIRA, About European Interoperability Reference Architecture, available at
https://joinup.ec.europa.eu/collection/european-interoperability-reference-architecture-eira/about
118 European Commission, About ISA², available at https://ec.europa.eu/isa2/isa2_en
46


VIII.
Support Research
Research is the foundation of our current living standards, our economic prosperity,
and our political independence. Technical and scientific progress are necessary to
guarantee our future prosperity and meet the environmental and social challenges of
tomorrow. Volt’s science policy aims to create an even more innovative and
competitive European research landscape while respecting the EU’s fundamental
values, e.g. freedom and sustainability.
The EU’s previous scientific programme (Horizon 2020) aimed to spend 3% of EU-wide
GDP on research by 2020. However, given past and current dynamics, this threshold
was not met as R&D expenditure by 2020 was 2.3%.122 The huge disparities in national
research spending across Europe are particularly striking.123 The new programme,
Horizon Europe, now seeks to increase EU-wide GDP expenditure on research and
development to 3% by 2030, instead124.
In contrast, emerging countries such as India and China show impressive scientific
development in international comparison. This is reflected not only in the increasing
numbers of scientific publications but also in the fact that China, for example,
reportedly lists more patent applications than all OECD countries combined. The
latest OECD figures on research spending also reveal that the EU average ranks below
that of the US and China and, even more alarmingly, below that of the OECD average.
This gives reason to intensify European research programmes.125
➢Meet and increase Europe 2020’s proposed 3% spending target of EU-wide
GDP on research. However, EU member states will most likely not reach this
target. Therefore, we aim for an even higher target and propose that 4% of the
EU-wide GDP are dedicated to research by 2025. This is necessary to remain
internationally competitive and to guarantee our vision of a prosperous
European future. Furthermore, increased research spending positively affects
productivity and economic growth.126
➢Facilitate and support diverse forms of research funding because we are
convinced that this is the best way to guarantee the freedom of science and, at
126 Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, The Fruits of R&D: Meta-analyses of the Effects of Research and
Development on Productivity, available at https://research.vu.nl/ws/portalfiles/portal/1403389
125 The World Bank, patent application, available at
http://databank.worldbank.org/data/reports.aspx?Report_Name=patent-application&Id=d484ab34, For
more details see EU Reform, Relationship with other multilateral institutions
124 European Commission, Regulation (EU) 2021/695 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
28 April 2021 establishing Horizon Europe – the Framework Programme for Research and Innovation,
laying down its rules for participation and dissemination, and repealing Regulations (EU) No 1290/2013
and (EU) No 1291/2013, available at http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2021/695/oj
123 European Commission, Interim Evaluation of Horizon 2020, available at
https://ec.europa.eu/info/publications/interim-evaluation-horizon-2020_en
122
Eurostat,
R&D
expenditure
in
the
EU
at
2.3%
of
GDP
in
2020,
available
at
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/en/web/products-eurostat-news/-/ddn-20211129-2
47


the same time, create incentives for public and private funding institutions to
engage in research in certain seminal areas. That is why we strive to involve not
only government funding institutions but also private foundations and
companies. We aim to incentivise them to invest in research projects.
Investments can either be of a general nature (like the German funding systems
at universities), project-specific, or solution-orientated.
➢Support collaboration between universities and industry. Both partners can
learn and benefit from each other in terms of scientific approaches, strategies,
funding, outcome exploitation, and so on.127 Ultimately, this will make research
efforts more productive. Create a platform where companies and research
groups can meet, exchange ideas, propose projects, consider research group
publications,128 and develop trust and long-term relationships.129
➢Highlight innovative research priorities, such as a European satellite system
or renewable energy solutions, and encourage research in European clusters,
with EU funding.
➢Promote and support European journals, conferences, interdisciplinary
academic exchange and national and European academic societies.
➢Found
European
research
institutes (e.g. European Molecular Biology
Laboratory (EMBL), European Union Institute for Security Studies (EUISS)) and a
European Informatics Laboratory.
➢Open technology incubators or technology parks for tech start-ups. Focus
on technology transfer to exploit the results, translation and centralised advice
on patent issues.
➢Advocate for research and science to the public, generate enthusiasm and
motivate people to participate in research. Recruit foreign talent and
researchers based on free and independent ethical research and occupational
stability.
➢Expand European databases and innovate the use of data to promote new
research directions.130
130 For example, Zenodo, Recent upload, available at https://zenodo.org
129 MIT Sloan Management Review, Best Practices for Industry-University Collaboration Greitzer,
available at https://osp.mit.edu/sites/osp/files/uploads/bestpractices.pdf; Praxis Auril, Making
industry-university partnerships work: Lessons from successful collaborations, available at
https://www.praxisunico.org.uk/resource/making-industry-university-partnerships-work-lessons-succes
sful-collaborations; PLOS one, Industry-university collaborations in Canada, Japan, the UK and
USA–With emphasis on publication freedom and managing the intellectual property lock-up problem,
available at http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0090302
128 Universiteit Gent, Investigating the Factors That Diminish the Barriers to University–industry
Collaboration, available at https://biblio.ugent.be/publication/2051456
127 Journal of Education and Work, Industry–University Collaboration for Continuing Professional
Development, available at https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/1363908032000093058
48


➢Support global research and innovation networks and transform the EU into
a global centre of excellence.
➢Introduce tax exemptions for R&D across the EU. Provide public funding to
research through sustainable financial instruments (debt and equity).
49


