Volt’s Mapping of Policies
Edition 9.0
Challenge 5 - Citizen Empowerment
1


Table of contents:
I. Vision
3
II. Foster vibrant, pluralistic, and accessible public spheres to enable citizens to make informed political decisions
4
A. Promote free and pluralistic cultural and media landscapes
4
1. Ensure media pluralism
5
2. Fight to ensure that a strong and independent public media exists in the member states
9
3. Create a European public broadcasting platform
10
4. Support strong and dynamic cultural and creative industry sectors
10
B. Open public data
11
III. Strengthen the ability of citizens to influence politics
13
A. Grant full voting rights to mobile EU citizens in the member state where they live
13
B. Improve accessibility of elections at European, national and local levels
14
C. Strengthen the ability of citizens to influence politics beyond elections
15
1. Strengthen transnational European democracy
16
2. Strengthen tools for direct citizen engagement in politics
17
3. Empower citizens and governments to take concrete action
19
2


Challenge 5 - Citizen Empowerment
I.
Vision
For Volt, the EU is a unique political space waiting to be filled with democratic life.
European citizens need to be empowered to make informed political decisions, be
able to influence politics beyond elections alone, and exercise their democratic rights
within vibrant, resilient, and deliberative democracies.
First, we encourage local communities to start looking at the European Union as a
potential problem-solver (as opposed to a problem-maker) and to collaborate across
borders
when
tackling
local
problems.
Volt
will
highlight
opportunities
to
constructively use the European spaces where they exist, to use the tools already
available for doing so, and to develop new channels for citizens to participate in
political
life. Furthermore, Volt will engage in capacity-building activities to
strengthen citizens’ ability to meaningfully participate in and influence political
processes. And of course, we will practise what we preach by applying the standards
we put down for citizen empowerment to ourselves.
We want to foster lively, pluralistic, and accessible public spheres, which is why we
advocate for a range of measures to safeguard media freedom and pluralism
throughout Europe and support fostering the emergence of a transnational European
media landscape. We also support strong and dynamic cultural and creative industry
sectors, as these are key to maintaining European pluralism. We also want to ensure
the openness of public data. We think open data provides an ideal and effective
gateway for citizen empowerment: it can provide an objective basis for analysis,
debate, and education, as well as empower citizens to make innovative use of the data
available to them and to acknowledge their role in generating change.
We want to increase citizens’ opportunities to influence political and policy processes.
Throughout
Europe,
citizens
choose
their
European,
national,
and
local
representatives through the act of elections, and we want to make sure that elections
across all of Europe are free and fair. We also acknowledge that political innovations
in general, and digital technologies in particular, have given rise to a variety of tools
and processes that make it possible for citizens to actively take part in democratic
civic life beyond elections alone. This is why we advocate for a range of concrete tools
for strengthening participatory and transnational European democracy.
3


II.
Foster vibrant, pluralistic, and accessible public
spheres to enable citizens to make informed
political decisions
Empowered European citizenship requires vibrant, pluralistic, and accessible public
spheres in the individual EU member states and in Europe as a whole. Informed
political decisions are only possible under conditions in which information is freely
accessible. This requires a functioning, healthy, and independent public sphere, one in
which citizens not only have access to quality information but are also able to process
this information; where diverse perspectives are publicly deliberated by the media,
political actors, and civil society; and where citizens are able to choose between valid
political alternatives.
A. Promote free and pluralistic cultural and media landscapes
“The freedom and pluralism of the media shall be respected.” Media freedom and
1
pluralism are essential pillars of democracy and thus are enshrined as fundamental
values in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union. Unfortunately,
2
today’s European media landscapes are under high pressure and stress: independence
and pluralism of the media are threatened in many European states, and a
transnational European media landscape is still in its infancy. Furthermore,
many
3
citizens’ information and communication habits have shifted towards the Internet. On
the one hand, the Internet facilitates access to information and offers citizens new
opportunities for participation, discussion, and shaping opinions. On the other hand,
the emergence of a digital marketplace for news poses fundamental challenges to
quality journalism, both online and in print. News outlets everywhere are struggling
to find sustainable business models, while coordinated misinformation campaigns are
undermining the very essence of rational discourse and decision-making across the
globe. This undermines public trust in democratic institutions.4
4 Edelman, 2022 Executive summary, available at
https://www.edelman.com/sites/g/files/aatuss191/files/2022-01/2022%20Edelman%20Trust%20Baro
meter%20FINAL_Jan25.pdf
3 The Media Pluralism Monitor publishes a yearly report on the risks for media pluralism in Europe.
Media Pluralism Monitor, 2022 Report, available at: https://cmpf.eui.eu/mpm2022-results/
2 The EU’s commitment to respect freedom and pluralism of the media, as well as the right to
information and freedom of expression is enshrined in Art. 11 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights,
similar to the provision of Art. 10 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms. See also the Conclusions of the Council and of the Representatives of the
Governments of the Member States, meeting within the Council, on media freedom and pluralism in
the digital environment, 2014/C 32/04 available at
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:52014XG0204(02)&from=EN
1 Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, article 11.2, available at
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/charter/pdf/text_en.pdf
4


Volt strives to support innovative solutions to these challenges by encouraging
citizens to use the available tools needed to navigate today’s complex media
landscapes. Volt therefore advocates a range of measures to safeguard media
freedom and pluralism throughout Europe and to foster the emergence of a
transnational European public sphere. Volt also advocates for the strengthening of
Europe’s diverse cultural landscape in order to safeguard the pluralism that underlies
the European project as a whole.
1. Ensure media pluralism
➢Encourage the treatment of quality journalism as a public good, not a
commodity. While public broadcasting institutions in many European countries
5
are expressions of an understanding of quality journalism as a public good, the
quality of the media landscape also depends on a range of private actors. The
vast majority of these actors struggle significantly to finance their endeavours
with the tools available to them under free market criteria (i.e., advertising). In
the
digital
realm,
users
often
access
news
via
social
media,
where
non-transparent algorithms often cannot distinguish between quality and
misleading media, and users expect to consume journalistic content for free.
Some actors have moved their top-quality content behind paywalls, excluding
non-paying users. Others, like The Guardian, have so far refrained from doing
so, relying instead on readers’ subscriptions and a foundation model to keep
their products accessible to all. Volt strongly encourages the exploration of
innovative funding mechanisms to ensure the provision of quality journalism as
a public good, safeguarding its non-excludable and non-rivalrous nature all
across Europe.
➢Work to ensure freedom of information and freedom of expression. An
engaged citizenry is not possible without the freedoms of information and
5 See for instance Allern, Sigurd and Pollack, Ester, Journalism as a Public Good: A Scandinavian
Perspective, available at
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/320306842_Journalism_as_a_public_good_A_Scandinavian_
perspective;  ResearchGate, Journalism as a public good: A Scandinavian perspective,
available at http://niemanreports.org/articles/news-is-a-public-good/
5


expression. These freedoms must be upheld on the Internet as well as offline.
6
7
Volt will work to ensure that relevant actions are taken to uphold freedom of
information and expression in Europe, particularly in places where these
freedoms are in danger. Volt therefore calls on the Commission and the
Member States to fully support and strengthen the tools already developed
with regard to the promotion and protection of the rights and freedoms
enshrined in Art. 11 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European
Union, such as the Media Pluralism Monitor and the Council of Europe Platform
for the Protection of Journalism and Safety of Journalists.8
➢Ensure the safety and security of journalists. The safety and security of
journalists is fundamentally important for a pluralistic media landscape. Volt
will support a range of measures to ensure journalists in Europe are safe and
have secure working environments, e.g. by calling on the Member States to
fully support the initiative launched by Reporters Without Borders for the
creation of a Special Representative to the United Nations Secretary-General
for the safety of journalists.9
➢Demand transparency of media ownership and influence.
In order to be
10
able to make informed decisions, consumers of media must be able to
understand whose interests a medium serves. States are invited to ensure the
independence
of
their
audiovisual
regulatory
authorities, and to take
appropriate measures to achieve genuine transparency of media ownership and
funding sources, safeguard the right of journalists to protect their sources and
to protect journalists from undue influence, and, depending on their national
context, to prevent possible negative effects of excessive concentration of
10 The Media Pluralism Monitor regularly publishes its findings on the risks concerning market plurality
in
the
media
sector.
Media
Pluralism
Monitor,
2017
Report,
available
at
http://cmpf.eui.eu/media-pluralism-monitor/mpm-2017-2/
9 Ibid.
8 European Parliament, European Parliament resolution of 3 May 2018 on media pluralism and media
freedom in the European Union (2017/2209(INI)), available at
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?pubRef=-//EP//TEXT+TA+P8-TA-2018-0204+0+DOC+X
ML+V0//EN
7 For more details see MoP, Smart State, Guarantee digital rights and freedoms, Digital rights.
6 “1. Everyone has the right to freedom of expression. This right shall include freedom to hold opinions
and to receive and impart information and ideas without interference by public authority and
regardless of frontiers. 2. The freedom and pluralism of the media shall be respected.” See Charter of
Fundamental Rights of the European Union, article 11, available at
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/charter/pdf/text_en.pdf; The European Commission regards freedom
of information and freedom of expression as fundamental pillars of democracy. See European
Commission, Freedom of Expression, available at
https://web.archive.org/web/20190610213517/https://ec.europa.eu/europeaid/sectors/human-right
s-and-democratic-governance/democracy/freedom-expression_en; Official Journal of the European
Union, Conclusions of the Council and of the Representatives of the Governments of the Member
States, meeting within the Council, on media freedom and pluralism in the digital environment 2014/C
32/04, available at
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:52014XG0204(02)&from=EN
6


media ownership.11
➢Foster education in media literacy.
Media literacy includes all the technical,
12
cognitive, social, civic, and creative capacities that allow a person to access the
media, to have a critical understanding of the media, and to interact with it.
In
13
today’s news and media landscape, it becomes ever more important to be able
to distinguish between credible and fake news sources and content. Volt will
seek to support educational measures undertaken by educational institutions
such as schools, as well as aim to strengthen the role of civil society, public
institutions, and academia in this area.
As also mentioned in our Smart State
14
chapter, Volt supports efforts to teach “critical thinking” in schools, not only in
relation to the media but also with regard to information disseminated by
individuals
(e.g.
politicians)
and
institutions
(e.g.
NGOs,
civil
society
organisations, think tanks, political parties).
➢Push the EU to safeguard the democratic public sphere necessary for the
functioning of a European democracy.
In order for public spheres to be
15
conducive to a functioning democracy, they need to be places where open and
free deliberation amongst a variety of actors (e.g., citizens, civil society
organisations, political actors, media, etc.) can take place. Volt will strengthen
the ability of the EU to uphold its citizens’ fundamental rights and to intervene
effectively in cases where media freedom and pluralism are threatened in EU
member states.
For instance, Volt calls on the Commission to propose an
16
16 For instance, by working to increase the effectiveness of the current procedure after Art. 7 TEU. For
more information, see European Parliament, Rule of Law Concerns in Poland: How the Article 7
15 The Report of the High Level Group on Media Freedom and Pluralism, A free and pluralistic media to
sustain European democracy, available at
https://web.archive.org/web/20210311104357/https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/sites/digit
al-agenda/files/HLG%20Final%20Report.pdf.
14 A survey conducted by the EU Media Literacy Expert Group in 2016 found that out of the main media
literacy stakeholders, over a third were categorised as civil society, followed by public authorities and
academia. More than two-thirds of all stakeholders did not have a statutory responsibility in this area
but based their engagement on other motivations. For more information, see European Audiovisual
Observatory, Mapping of Media Literacy Practices and Actions in EU-28, p. 3, available at
http://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/document.cfm?doc_id=43878
13 This is the definition of the EU Media Literacy Expert Group (MLEG). The European Commission brings
together stakeholders in media literacy in an Expert Group on Media Literacy which meets annually to
identify, document and extend good practices in the field of media literacy, facilitate networking
between different stakeholders, with the aim of cross-fertilisation, explore synergies between
different EU policies and support programmes and media literacy initiatives. For more information, see
European Commission, Meeting of the Media Literacy Expert Group, available at
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/meetings-media-literacy-expert-group
12 For more details see Smart State, Build an enabling education system for the future, Curriculum
reform.
11 Official Journal of the European Union, Conclusions of the Council and of the Representatives of the
Governments of the Member States, meeting within the Council, on media freedom and pluralism in
the digital environment, 2014/C 32/04, available at
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:52014XG0204(02)&from=EN
7


Anti-SLAPP (strategic lawsuit against public participation) Directive that will
protect independent media from vexatious lawsuits intended to silence or
intimidate them.
Volt will explore the introduction of further mechanisms
17
that allow for the effective oversight of media independence at the European
level, which would be conducted by a politically independent body.
➢Create a truly pan-European public sphere. Volt shall encourage the EU to act
where common rules in the Single Market may be necessary to prevent
distortions in the functioning of the media arising from divergent Member
State laws, especially with regard to online news and public media.
Volt will
18
advocate for the creation of pan-European media outlets and for the
dissemination of media content throughout the EU, in order to support the
emergence of a transnational political public space and democracy, advocate
for the cross-border accessibility of national public broadcasting content
throughout the EU, and call for an increase in EU support and funding for
training of journalists, as well as for quality and investigative journalism in the
EU.
➢Incentivise greater media coverage of EU affairs. Volt will encourage live
coverage of national and European parliamentary gatherings by public media as
a contribution to fostering the emergence of a pan-European public sphere. It
will call for practical measures at the EU and member state levels to incentivize
more general media coverage of EU affairs. At the EU institutional level, this
might include encouraging regular interviews of presidents of EU institutions
with panels of national media outlets from across the EU.
The goal would be
19
to promote a deeper general understanding of the European dimensions of
various national policies.20
20 Ibid.
19 Ibid.
18 The Report of The High Level Group on Media Freedom and Pluralism, A free and pluralistic media to
sustain European democracy, available at
https://web.archive.org/web/20210311104357/https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/sites/digit
al-agenda/files/HLG%20Final%20Report.pdf.
17 European Parliament, European Parliament resolution of 3 May 2018 on media pluralism and media
freedom in the European Union (2017/2209(INI)), available at
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?pubRef=-//EP//TEXT+TA+P8-TA-2018-0204+0+DOC+X
ML+V0//EN
Procedure Would Work, available at
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/headlines/eu-affairs/20180222STO98434/rule-of-law-concern
s-in-poland-how-the-article-7-procedure-would-work
8


➢Support the standards put forth by the Council of Europe to ensure media
pluralism in Europe.21
2. Fight to ensure that a strong and independent public media
exists in the member states
➢Ensure sustainable funding for public media. Encourage member states to
grant
public
funding
to
media
organizations
only
on
the
basis
of
non-discriminatory, objective, and transparent criteria. Work to ensure that a
funding provision exists for media which are essential for pluralism (including
geographical,
linguistic,
cultural
and
political
pluralism)
but
are
not
commercially viable. Ensure that the EU has the ability to intervene in cases
where state budget cuts to media actors endanger media freedom and
pluralism. Specify that any EU funding is contingent on the adherence to core
EU values as specified in Art. 2 TEU.22
➢Ensure media’s independence from government interference. Ensure that
the public media in the EU member states are free from government
interference. Ensure that public media are overseen by independent bodies,
such as media councils, that are composed of a politically and culturally diverse
membership.23
➢Work to ensure a healthy balance between public and private media
journalism. Public, non-profit media have a unique role to play in preserving
pluralism and democratic values; if the media only followed free-market
principles, Europe's cultural and linguistic diversity would be jeopardised.
However, in some countries, concerns exist regarding the risk of unfair
competition. Recognizing the different legal and organisational contexts in the
Member States, Volt will advocate for the strengthening or implementation of
relevant control mechanisms, such as the introduction of independent media
councils or media ombudspersons, to ensure that a healthy balance between
public non-profit and private media exists.
➢Push for the exploration and establishment of innovative mechanisms to
involve citizens in public media’s programme selection.
23 The Report of the High Level Group on Media Freedom and Pluralism, A free and pluralistic media to
sustain European democracy, available at
https://web.archive.org/web/20210311104357/https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/sites/digit
al-agenda/files/HLG%20Final%20Report.pdf.
22
Consolidated
Version
of
the
Treaty
on
European
Union,
article
2,
available
at
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:C:2008:115:0013:0045:en:PDF
21 Council of Europe, Recommendations and declarations of the Committee of Ministers of the Council
of Europe in the field of media and information society, available at
https://rm.coe.int/CoERMPublicCommonSearchServices/DisplayDCTMContent?documentId=09000016
80645b44
9


➢Promote the creation of a European media space. Call for an increase in EU
support and funding for the training of journalists as well as for quality
investigative journalism in the EU.
3. Create a European public broadcasting platform
➢Work towards the establishment of a common European broadcasting
platform
in order to supply EU citizens with an effective means of receiving
24
information about the political situation in the various member states.
Encourage the European Broadcast to serve as a platform for translated
content from the national services, with content being made available through
multiple channels (radio, television, and internet). The French-German channel
Arte
may serve as an example.
25
4. Support strong and dynamic cultural and creative industry
sectors
➢Stress the importance of the cultural and creative industry sectors for
vibrant democracies. Cultural and creative industries are vital to vibrant,
pluralistic, and accessible public spheres, as they complement the media in
processing information and cultural content in any society. Politically relevant
debates are often the subjects of literature, music, or theatre productions.
Furthermore, culture and creativity play an important role in strengthening the
unique identity of places. They can also be important drivers and enablers for
innovation and entrepreneurship. Culture also has an important role to play in
promoting social inclusion.
Europe’s shared cultural heritage has served as a
26
unifying force ever since the commencement of European integration after the
Second World War, contributing to a shared sense of belonging across the EU.
Volt fully supports the European Union’s “unity in diversity” motto and stresses
the importance of the cultural and creative industries in fostering constructive
dialogues within Europe’s democracies.
➢Call for an increase in EU funding for transnational cultural cooperation in
Europe. EU funding for culture, through the Erasmus+ programme, supports
programmes for Europeans to study, train, gain experience, and volunteer
abroad,
thus contributing to exchange among Europeans and fostering the
27
emergence of a shared European identity. Funding for the audiovisual, cultural,
27 European Commission, Erasmus+, available at http://ec.europa.eu/programmes/erasmus-plus/
26 European Commission, Culture, available at
http://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/en/policy/themes/culture/
25 ARTE, Home, available at https://www.arte.tv/en/
24 European Parliament, European Parliament resolution of 3 May 2018 on media pluralism and media
freedom
in
the
European
Union
(2017/2209(INI)),
consideration
62,
available
at
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?pubRef=-//EP//TEXT+TA+P8-TA-2018-0204+0+DOC+X
ML+V0//EN
10


and the creative sector is provided through the Creative Europe programme.28
The EU also supports projects promoting conservation and research in the area
of Europe’s cultural heritage.
Volt advocates for an increase in EU funding for
29
transnational cultural cooperation.
➢Decrease the administrative burden of receiving funding. EU funding is often
associated with an extremely high administrative burden for applicants,
requiring a sizable investment of time and coordination. This makes it
disproportionately difficult for small actors and civil society organisations to
apply for funding. At the same time, external funding is of existential
importance for many of these smaller actors, with EU funding playing a
significant role with regard to their potential to engage in cross-border
collaborations. Volt advocates for a decrease in this administrative burden
while ensuring that necessary transparency and accountability criteria are
upheld.
➢Foster measures to achieve the goals of the UNESCO 2005 Convention on
the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions.30
B. Open public data
Digitalisation, increased connectivity, openness and transparency are leading to
changes in citizen expectations with regard to communicating with, and accessing the
data of, public authorities. Open data (i.e., data collected by public institutions which
is shared with the public) provides an ideal and effective gateway for citizen
empowerment. It can provide an objective basis for analysis, debate, and education, as
well as empower citizens to make innovative use of the data available to them. It can
also be used to foster trust in government institutions as public authorities have the
opportunity to become more effective and efficient, and citizens have the ability to
verify political realities. In order for this to happen, however, citizens need the ability
and skills to interpret this data. Our call to open public data on the one hand entails a
strong commitment to the protection of private data on the other hand, as well as a
call to foster educational measures with regard to data interpretation literacy.
30 UNESCO, Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions 2005,
available at
http://portal.unesco.org/en/ev.php-URL_ID=31038&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html The
Convention has been ratified by the European Union. See UNESCO, Convention on the Protection and
Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions, available at
http://www.unesco.org/eri/la/convention.asp?KO=31038&language=E&order=alpha
29 European Commission, Cultural Heritage, available at
https://ec.europa.eu/research/environment/index.cfm?pg=cultural
28 European Commission, Creative Europe, available at
https://ec.europa.eu/programmes/creative-europe/
11


➢Strongly advocate for the public availability and openness of public data.
Advocate for understanding open data as a public good, meaning it is
non-excludable (everyone has access to it) and non-rivalrous (usage by one
person does not reduce its availability to others). Encourage the sharing of
public data under an open licence and in an open format. Specifically, insist on
the open-source character of publicly funded research.
➢Insist on the protection of private data and ensure that published public
data does not compromise privacy. Insist on the protection of citizens’ privacy
with regard to the possibility of aggregating large amounts of data collected by
government actors and private authorities. Ensure that no data may be linked
to citizens’ personal information such as names, identification numbers,
addresses, etc. Call for an increase in research about measures to safeguard the
privacy of citizens, as data about them is collected by public (and private)
authorities over a prolonged period of time.31
➢Advocate for a general increase in government transparency.
Encourage
32
making government data, priorities, and findings regularly accessible to citizens
in a way that is easily understood, e.g., by regularly publishing “user-friendly”
budget reports and by shedding light on legislative processes. Encourage the
sharing of data and services between administrations in order to trigger
savings and efficiencies.33
➢Stress the potential positive effects of open data with regard to knowledge
building, citizen engagement, and innovation.
➢Make sure that all EU member states and their local authorities comply
with the Open Data Charter.
Data should be (1) open by default (i.e., all data
34
gathered by public institutions is published automatically, unless governments
can justify keeping it undisclosed); (2) published in a timely and comprehensible
manner; (3) accessible and usable (machine readable and under an open
licence–this ensures that not only companies with highly paid staff can access
it, but also ordinary people like high school students or interested retirees); (4)
comparable and interoperable; (5) used for improved governance and citizen
engagement, and (6) used for inclusive development and innovation.
34 The Open Data Charter, available at https://opendatacharter.net/
33 Estonia is using this model effectively with X-Road. For more information see E-estonia,
Interoperability Services, available at https://e-estonia.com/solutions/interoperability-services/x-road/
32 For more details see MoP Smart State, Administrative effectiveness to reduce waste and improve
service quality, Glass State, and MoP Smart State, Administrative effectiveness to reduce waste and
improve service quality, Digital revolution, in e-Governance.
31 Berkman Klein Centre for Internet and Society at Harvard University, Practical Approaches to Big
Data Privacy Over Time, available at https://cyber.harvard.edu/publications/2018/03/BigDataPrivacy
12


III.
Strengthen the ability of citizens to influence
politics
Article 21 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights guarantees to all people “the
right to take part in the government of his country, directly or through freely chosen
representatives”.
The functioning of the European Union itself is “founded on
35
representative democracy” as well as participatory democracy,
with a wealth of
36
different variations of democracy at
local, national, and transnational levels.
Everywhere throughout Europe, citizens choose their representatives through the act
of elections. Yet, electoral democracy is complemented, and can be further
strengthened, via elements of participatory democracy. Political innovation in
general, and digital technologies in particular, have given rise to a variety of tools and
processes that make it possible for citizens to more actively take part in democratic
civic life beyond elections alone.
Through widespread public participation in civic affairs and the use of democratic
tools, citizens can help assure that their individual and collective interests are being
heard and responded to by governments that are held accountable by citizens. Volt
advocates for the strengthening of EU democracy and its member states’ democracies
through the creation of additional accountability mechanisms. Starting locally, citizens
are encouraged to elevate issues to the European level by collaborating across
borders using both existing tools (e.g., freedom of information requests or complaints
to the European Commission or EU Ombudsman)and new channels for citizen
participation, such as European Citizens’ Initiatives. Volt will engage in a range of
capacity-building activities with the goal of enabling meaningful citizen engagement
by allowing citizens, governmental institutions, and other actors to enter into a
meaningful exchange. In doing so, Volt will strengthen citizens’ ability to influence
politics beyond elections alone.
A. Grant full voting rights to mobile EU citizens in the
member state where they live.
Ensure that all EU citizens are allowed to participate in democratic processes in
the EU country where they reside. Under the current legislation, EU citizens living in
a member state, of which they are not nationals, are allowed only to vote or stand as
candidates at European and municipal elections . Thus, millions of EU citizens have no
37
right to elect (or be elected as) representatives in the parliament of the country in
which they live, work, and pay taxes. In addition, they are excluded from influencing
37 Article 39 and 40 of EU Charter of Fundamental Rights
36 Consolidated Version of the Treaty on European Union, article 10, available at
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:C:2008:115:0013:0045:en:PDF
35 United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights, article 21, available at
https://www.un.org/sites/un2.un.org/files/2021/03/udhr.pdf
13


decisions through direct democratic tools, such as referenda or citizen assemblies,
which are becoming increasingly important in our evolving democracy. While more
and more EU citizens are living outside national borders, the democracy deficit and
exclusiveness are becoming serious issues, which threaten the functioning of our
society. Therefore, we demand that after a certain period of permanent residence in
the host country, mobile EU citizens be granted full voting rights (active and passive)
at municipal, regional, and national levels. A blueprint for such a regulation can be
found in developed democracies such as Scotland
and New Zealand
that already
38
39
have legislation in place. At the same time, voting rights in the country of origin
should be restricted as a general rule to ensure equal representation and safeguard
the democratic principle of "one person, one vote". Under certain conditions and upon
request, a mobile EU citizen may revoke the voting rights in the home country and
abstain from voting in the host country.
Harmonise the election law regarding the rights of mobile EU citizens and
coordinate its implementation. All laws regarding the voting rights of mobile EU
citizens have to be combined into a single piece of legislation. For this purpose, we
want to advocate for the EC to implement a process and guidelines for a safe,
barrier-free, digital, central registry and voting system with automatic voter
recognition. The implementation should be accompanied by a wide information
campaign, and its quality should be assured through ongoing monitoring, research,
and analysis.
B. Improve accessibility of elections at European, national
and local levels40
➢Ensure that all European citizens have the ability to vote in free and fair
elections. The right to vote is one of the fundamental rights of European
citizens. However, several groups of people (e.g., the disabled, elderly, or sick)
are currently experiencing difficulties exercising their right to vote due to a lack
of accessibility to elections.
Volt will push for the removal of current barriers
41
to participation in elections, such as restrictions on legal capacity, lack of access
to information and polling stations, and a general lack of awareness among
affected groups.
Ensure that the organisation and scheduling of elections
42
encourage high voter participation.
42 Inclusion Europe, Accessible Elections, available at
http://www.inclusion-europe.eu/accessible-elections-2/
41 Inclusion Europe, Recommendations for Accessible Elections in Europe, available at
http://inclusion-europe.eu/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/Policy_Recommendations_EN.pdf
40 For more details see MoP EU Reform, Institutional Reform and Governance, The legislative branch
and MoP EU Reform, Institutional Reform and Governance, The executive branch
39 Kate McMillan (2014) “National Voting Rights for Permanent Residents - New Zealand's Experience”
38 Scottish Elections (Franchise and Representation) Bill
https://www.parliament.scot/bills-and-laws/bills/scottish-elections-franchise-and-representation-bill
14


➢Encourage EU citizens to exercise their rights to vote in the member state
in which they live. Remove barriers currently hindering EU nationals living in
another EU Member State from voting in elections in which they have the right
to vote. Encourage Member States to make it easier for mobile EU citizens to
register to vote and ease the administrative burden.43
➢Promote measures to incentivize mobile EU citizens to take advantage of
their rights and opportunities to participate in their home and host
country’s civic and political life.
➢Explore e-voting.
Advocate for the further development and implementation
44
of
e-voting
once
security
concerns
have
been successfully addressed.
Encourage further research around the issue of e-voting, with the goal of
providing all European citizens with a secure, anonymous, verifiable, and
accessible electronic vote.
C. Strengthen the ability of citizens to influence politics
beyond elections
Volt is strongly engaged in democratising Europe at every level—locally, nationally,
and transnationally—with a specific focus on giving Europeans a voice regardless of
whether they live in their home country or not. Importantly, Volt actively works
towards democratising Europe by treating the European Union as a unique political
space for action. Furthermore, Volt is deeply convinced that citizens can provide
valuable information, opinions, innovation, leadership, and action that can contribute
to solving local, national, European, and global challenges. In today’s fast-paced
environment, in order to counteract estrangement between citizens and their political
representatives, more productive interaction is needed between them.
The goal is to empower citizens and make them active participants in the political
process, creating an environment more conducive for citizens to voice their concerns,
offer their ideas, take initiative, and hold governments and their representatives
accountable. Government officials and politicians, on the other hand, will be
empowered to be closer to their constituencies, able to better understand their
challenges, and able to tap into and build on the capacity of their community in order
to
solve
identified
challenges
more
effectively
and
collaboratively.
Citizen
engagement shall be promoted as a key factor in shaping the future of European
democracy.
44 E-voting is an aspect of e-democracy. ECAS, 2019, Digital Democracy Report, available at
https://ecas.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/DDD2019-Report_Final.pdf
43 European Citizen Action Service, Obstacles to Political Rights of EU Citizens: Survey Report, available
at http://ecas.org/obstacles-political-rights-eu-citizens/
15


1. Strengthen transnational European democracy
➢Utilise
and
promote the European Union as a unique transnational
democratic space. Volt recognizes the EU as a unique political space that can
and should be used for citizens to articulate and organise their political
demands. This may happen through coordinated action using established tools
at
the
European
level
(such
as
European
Citizens’
Initiatives,
public
consultations, and petitions) and informal, innovative actions. Volt will enable
citizens and civil society organisations to share their challenges and solutions
across borders and learn from each other’s best practices. Many regions and
local
communities
across
Europe
can
identify
similar
challenges.
Volt
encourages citizens and civil society organisations to organise together around
these challenges to find solutions and bring their challenges to the attention of
the relevant institutions and politicians, if necessary.
➢Diminish the threshold for filing a European Citizens’ Initiative (ECI). The
European Citizens’ Initiative (ECI) allows EU citizens to participate directly in the
development of EU policies by allowing them to call on the European
Commission to make a legislative proposal on matters where the EU has a
competence to legislate.
However, a citizens’ initiative currently has to be
45
backed by at least one million EU citizens from at least seven member states,
with a minimum number of signatories
required in each of these seven
46
member states.
Volt wants to lower the threshold necessary for a European
47
Citizens’ Initiative (ECI) by cutting the minimum number of signatories in half, to
500,000.
➢Promote the establishment of a pan-European discussion platform for
European citizens. Europeans everywhere are faced with similar challenges,
yet, currently, there is a lack of spaces beyond social media (which pose privacy
problems and the algorithms of which are not conducive to substantial debate)
where issues can be discussed not only across language barriers but also with
relevant stakeholders. A pan-European moderated discussion platform should
aim to identify issues Europeans care about in order to then facilitate a
moderated exchange beyond party lines among citizens and politicians,
political institutions, civil society organisations, and other relevant interest
groups. Discussions and exchanges should be moderated by an independent,
47 Since its inception in 2012 only 4 European initiatives have met these requirements. See European
Commission, The European Citizens Initiative: basic facts, available at
http://ec.europa.eu/citizens-initiative/public/basic-facts
46 The number of signatories varies from country to country. See European Commission, The European
Citizens’ Initiative: Minimum number of signatories per member state, available at
http://ec.europa.eu/citizens-initiative/public/signatories
45 The rules and procedures governing the citizens’ initiative are detailed in Regulation (EU) 2019/788 of
the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 April 2019 on the European citizens' initiative
available at
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid=1558082143592&uri=CELEX%3A32019R0788
16


multi-stakeholder entity adhering to a clear set of principles and values.
Facilitation should involve a strong commitment to clear (n)etiquette and a
bridging of party lines.
2. Strengthen tools for direct citizen engagement in politics
➢Introduce
digital
platforms
to
communicate
with
administrations.
Administrations shall be incentivised to introduce open digital platforms
through which citizens can actively participate in relevant political discussions
and decision-making processes.
Subjects discussed on these kinds of
48
platforms
might
include
local
infrastructure
proposals
or
plans
for
restructuring public spaces. Deliberative processes taking place on such
platforms should be transparent, respectful, and take existing administrative
rules, frameworks, and procedures into account. Participation should be free to
all interested persons affected by a particular measure. The online deliberative
efforts taking place on the digital platform should be complemented by
face-to-face consultations. The highest privacy and security standards should
be implemented on the digital platform.
➢Encourage the introduction of citizen assemblies. Citizen assemblies are an
innovative tool to allow citizens to deliberate on complex political issues. They
can increase the quality and legitimacy of political decisions, especially when
the results of citizen assemblies directly influence policy or the spending of
local funds.
Citizen assemblies should be constructed in such a way that
49
diverse groups of citizens are randomly represented, so that the diversity of
the population is mirrored in the composition of the assembly; this diverse
group of people then meets in order to tackle a specific issue. A clear
process—involving
comprehensive
briefings
and
independent
expert
input—should enable these citizens to shape informed opinions. These can
then be debated in a group in order to reach a shared output. Respective
politicians should be held to account for the implementation of the citizen
assemblies’ output; for this reason, it is important to secure the commitment
and support of local politicians from the very beginning. Volt advocates for the
implementation of clear mechanisms to trigger a citizen assembly, such as
requiring a quorum of signatures to be reached within a particular time frame.
➢Promote participatory budgeting. Participatory budgeting allows citizens to
directly influence and allocate government investments, provided that political
49 Best practices in this area are Ireland, see The Citizens’ Assembly, available at
https://www.citizensassembly.ie/en/; and the city of Gdansk, Poland, see How the Poles are making
democracy work again, available at
http://www.resilience.org/stories/2017-11-22/solutions-how-the-poles-are-making-democracy-work-ag
ain-in-gdansk/
48 An excellent example is the platform meinberlin, which is the citizen engagement platform of the city
of Berlin, Germany. See Berlin.de, meinberlin, available at https://mein.berlin.de
17


buy-in and a respective budget exist.
The process of allocating the budget
50
collectively entails a process of deliberation and learning, with the goal of
allocating budgets in such a way as to serve the public interest. The set-up of
participants should reflect the diversity of the community affected by the
budgeting measure. Training and capacity-building for citizens should be
provided. Lastly, it needs to be ensured that the process is linked to assemblies
or councils that have the power to supervise implementation by the
administration.
Thus, constructed, participatory budgeting may strengthen
51
citizens’ democratic experience and impact. Implementation of participatory
budgeting at the European level should also be explored.
➢Explore further political innovations for implementation. All over Europe,
innovative ideas regarding the topic of how best to involve citizens in
deliberative and political decision-making processes arise all the time. Volt will
continuously explore such novel ideas and approaches. For instance, diverse
citizen juries could be involved in shaping the debate around complex and
highly
politicised
European decisions. Citizen audits could complement
already-existing checks and balances on EU institutions.52
52 Following an example of a citizens’ audit on a local scale in the Netherlands. See XI Update, Citizen
Audit Mobilises Citizens Insights, available at
https://raad.oude-ijsselstreek.nl/Vergaderingen/Raadsrotonde/2014/11-september/20:00/Rapportage-
Burgervisitatiecommissie/Citizen-audit-Oude-IJsselstreek-English-explanation.pdf.
51 Yves Sintomer, Carsten Herzberg, Anja Röcke, From Porto Alegre to Europe: Potentials and
Limitations of Participatory Budgeting, available at
https://www.academia.edu/7324568/From_Porto_Alegre_to_Europe_Potentials_and_Limitations_of_P
articipatory_Budgeting_1
50 Best practices of participatory budgeting are Madrid, Paris, Antwerp, and the Netherlands.  For
example, in Madrid, 100 million EUR are distributed each year via digital citizen deliberation, See Decide
Madrid, Decide qué proyectos hará el Ayuntamiento con 100 millones, available at
https://decide.madrid.es/; For Paris, France, see
https://budgetparticipatif.paris.fr/bp/plugins/download/PB_in_Paris.pdf; In Paris, France, a citizen
budget also exists, see https://participedia.net/en/cases/participatory-budgeting-paris-france
18


3. Empower citizens and governments to take concrete action
➢Enable and empower citizens and government actors to use citizen
engagement techniques. Volt advocates for a new way of doing politics, one
where citizens feel empowered to actively participate in democratic life and
feel their voice makes a difference. Citizens shall be enabled to organise in
their communities around issues that are important to them and to act upon
their values. They shall also be enabled to hold their government and
politicians accountable. On the other hand, government officials, institutions,
and politicians everywhere should be more responsive to, and might even
encourage,
citizen
action.
If
citizens
are
at
the
centre
of
political
decision-making and government actors know how to respond to such
engagement, democracy will be strengthened.
○
Enable
and
empower
citizens
to
utilise
citizen
engagement
techniques and tools. Volt strongly advocates for an increase in funding
for citizen engagement projects throughout the European civil society
sector. Volt also advocates for the introduction of citizen engagement
techniques, strategies, and tools into educational programmes at the
high school and university levels. Such educational measures might be
achieved by adding citizen engagement to existing curricula, or they
might take the form of additional (one-day or several-day) civic
engagement classes. Moreover, community organising and leadership
development training shall be conducted in local communities, with the
goal of actively educating citizens on how to organise and exercise their
rights. Volt will also aim to empower citizens through community
organising campaigns, where citizens select the campaign issue and
receive training in campaigning and leadership. Volt will thus create and
foster the emergence of new community leaders.
○
Enable and empower government institutions to be responsive to
citizen engagement. Volt advocates for the training of government
officials and civil servants in the basics of citizen engagement, also with
regard to fostering a supportive institutional and organisational culture
of respecting and supporting citizen initiatives throughout government.
This effort will be helped by the creation of online platforms that enable
interactions between citizens and institutions at a local, national, and
European level. Institutions shall be enabled to include more or stronger
deliberative elements in their decision-making processes, encouraging
well-structured public discussions using analogue forums as well as
relevant technology.
○
Enable
and
empower
politicians
to
be
responsive
to
citizen
engagement. Volt will also encourage training on community organising
and other citizen engagement frameworks to different political actors, in
order to contribute to a general change in culture within the political
landscape.
19


