  
1 
Volt’s Mapping of Policies 
Edition 9.0 
Challenge 3 - Social Equality 
 


  
2 
Table of contents: 
 
Volt’s Mapping of Policies 
1 
Vision 
4 
Protect the human and civil rights of groups and minorities 
5 
Protect the human and civil rights of women 
5 
In the law 
5 
In the public sector 
6 
In the workplace 
7 
In the education system 
10 
Combating period poverty 
10 
Protect the human and civil rights of LGBTIQ+  people 
11 
In the law 
11 
In the public sector 
13 
In the workplace 
14 
In the education system 
15 
Protect the human and civil rights with regards to ethnicity, national origin, descent and skin colour 
16 
In the law 
16 
In the public sector 
18 
In the workplace 
18 
In the education system 
19 
Protect human and civil rights of Roma people 
19 
Protect the human and civil rights with regards religion or belief 
20 
In the law 
21 
In the public sector 
21 
In the workplace 
21 
In the education system 
22 
Protect human and civil rights of the Jewish people (Antisemitism) 
23 
Alleviate Poverty 
25 
Overall issues linked to Poverty 
25 
Social benefits and healthcare 
25 
In-work poverty 
26 
Social and Community Housing 
27 
A living space for everyone 
28 
Fair and efficient access to housing policies 
30 
Homelessness 
32 
Youth 
34 


  
3 
Education 
36 
Include everyone in society 
38 
Seniors 
38 
Intergenerational engagement 
38 
Infrastructures 
38 
Work 
39 
People with Special Educational Needs and Disability (SEND) 
39 
Education 
40 
Health and Wellbeing 
41 
Into Adulthood 
42 
Participation 
42 
Social Care 
43 
Holistic approach 
43 
Child in care 
43 
Own your body 
44 
Sex Work 
46 
Ending life with dignity 
46 
Reproductive rights 
48 
Abortion 
49 
Contraception 
49 
Education 
50 
Surrogacy 
50 
Conversion Therapy 
50 
 
 


  
4 
 
Challenge 3 -  Social Equality  
 
I. Vision  
 
Volt is a bold party that seeks to advance social equality to the greatest extent possible 
while adhering to economic, social, and political limitations. Volt's political choices must be 
systematically influenced by social equality, particularly when those choices conflict with the 
desires and interests of influential elites and corporate interests. 
Volt understands that social equality is the entire equality of chances for everyone. 
Striving for full equality of opportunity entails removing the influence of as many factors as 
possible that influence life outcomes but have nothing to do with free choices. These factors 
include one's birth circumstances, family circumstances, social identity, disability, and broader 
biological conditions. Many inequalities are often the result of problematic social structures, 
such as class privilege, patriarchy, heteronormativity, ableism, the primacy of the Christian 
religion, and racism, which Volt acknowledges. 
Volt recognizes the importance of free will in shaping one's life, but also the limitations 
of free will in an unequal world. In most cases, expanding the space for free choice promotes 
equality of opportunity. However, in the presence of significant income and wealth inequality, 
choice is not always a genuine option. In such cases, policy's role cannot be limited to expanding 
formal choice; it must also include levelling the playing field so that choice can be enjoyed fairly 
by all. 
Equality of opportunities should lead to, but does not presuppose, equality of outcomes. 
Equality of opportunity leads to statistical equality of outcomes at the group level. Equality of 
opportunity requires that equality of wealth, income, and status not become so broad as to 
become privilege. 
Social equality entails assisting people in achieving their own definition of a good life: it 
entails inclusion, interdependence, participation, fighting discrimination, and making 
room for (inventing) diversity. People are free to define and pursue a good life  in a variety of 
ways. Unless they conflict with the rights of other social groups, these differences in 
conceptions of the good life will be celebrated. Furthermore, Volt acknowledges the space for 
people to invent new dimensions of diversity as they reflect, operate on, and change their 
bodies, identities, and group structures in order to live good lives. Individuals cannot survive on 
their own, and equality is a key component in building communities and society itself by giving 
everyone a stake in society. Finally, supporting inclusion necessitates taking action against all 
forms of discrimination, strengthening public policies aimed at eliminating discrimination, and 
providing victims of discrimination with individual and collective action options. 
Respecting differences and encouraging inclusion includes group identities. Gender, sex, 
sexual orientation, race, class, ethnic group, religion, disability, and their intersections are all 


  
5 
included. Indeed, achieving true equality of respect and statistical equality of outcomes at the 
level of these groups is the essence of true social equality. 
Social equality applies to non-Europeans. Throughout its imperial history, Europe has unfairly 
benefited from and deeply harmed societies outside of Europe. Europe, aware of this, will not 
abuse its position and will work to correct inequalities between countries and peoples. 
Everyone is responsible for pursuing social equality, and social equality is a cross-cutting 
concern in all policy areas. Fairness, not market preferences, should determine work rewards, 
and businesses should be aware of their social responsibilities. Public authorities at all levels 
play a critical role in achieving social equality. Individuals must strive to understand and care 
for other people and their experiences, as well as act fairly toward them. 
 
 
 
II. Protect the human and civil rights of groups and 
minorities 
 
“All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights.”1 Let’s make Europe 
equal as soon as possible! 
 
 
A. Protect the human and civil rights of women  
 
Gender equality is a fundamental human right and one that should be rapidly achieved. 
In the current state of our society, women are still treated unfairly, face more barriers 
than their male counterparts, are subject to specific types of violence, and are 
discriminated against in their private, public, and professional lives. An example of this 
is the fact that women are heavily discriminated against in the workplace; they tend to 
have lower salaries, are underrepresented in senior management positions, and 
experience workplace bullying and harassment. Another example is that menstruating 
people are restricted in their ability to participate in society and are structurally 
disadvantaged due to their periods; period poverty is a global problem. 
 
 
1. In the law 
 
➢ Promote 
legislation 
and 
concrete 
action 
to 
address 
persistent 
discrimination against women. 
 
➢ Work towards ending violence against women in a comprehensive manner, 
including through the ratification of the Council of Europe Convention on 
 
1 Universal Declaration of Human Rights, article 1, available at: https://www.un.org/en/about-
us/universal-declaration-of-human-rights 


  
6 
preventing and combating both violence against women and domestic violence 
(the “Istanbul Convention”).2 
3 
2. In the public sector  
 
➢ Ensure that countries lead by example and apply inclusive and equal policies 
that actively contribute towards effective and sustainable gender equality. 
Comprehensive strategies are needed to address the issues, with a broad range 
of measures such as training and overcoming stereotypes. Women not only 
continue to be underrepresented in decision-making positions at all levels, but 
the rate of progression in this regard is slow.4 
○ Implement comprehensive programmes to encourage women to get into 
politics and support them once there, through training courses, 
mentoring, public campaigns, and other means.  
○ Educate the public about the benefits of gender parity in political decision 
making.5 
 
➢ Require political parties to ensure equal representation of men and women 
on their lists of candidates for elections.6 The European Commission itself has 
explained that “formal quotas are an effective way to accelerate the pace of 
progress and encourage political parties to seek the participation of women.”7 
 
 
2 For the full list, see Council of Europe, Chart of signatures and ratifications of Treaty 210, available at 
https://www.coe.int/en/web/conventions/full-list/-/conventions/treaty/210/signatures  
 
 
4 European Commission, 2017 Report on equality between women and men in the EU, available at 
https://eeas.europa.eu/sites/eeas/files/2017_report_equality_women_men_in_the_eu_en.pdf    
5 EIGE, Gender equality in Political Decision-making, available at 
http://eige.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/2016.1523_mh0116064enn_pdfweb_2017051109
5720.pdf  
6 France introduced a compulsory 50% gender parity provision. Political parties are required to ensure 
the equal representation of men and women on their lists of candidates for most elections. The first 
major impact of the quota was in 2007, when the number of women in parliament rose to 18.5 percent 
(after the elections in 2017 it further grew up to 40%). See International IDEA, Gender quotas database 
France, available at https://www.idea.int/data-tools/data/gender-quotas/country-view/86/35. This is 
the case in other European Countries, whether through a strict 50% rule like in France, or looser 
regulations. See International IDEA, Gender quotas database, available at https://www.idea.int/data-
tools/data/gender-quotas/database; Similar provisions already exist Germany, where most political 
parties introduced measures in their respective nomination procedures of candidates to increase the 
proportion of women in electoral lists. In particular gender quotas and zipping systems have proven 
positive effects. See Directorate-General for Internal Policies, Citizens’ rights and constitutional affairs, 
available at 
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/IDAN/2015/510025/IPOL_IDA(2015)510025_EN.pdf .  
7 European Commission, 2017 Report on equality between women and men in the EU, available at     
https://eeas.europa.eu/sites/eeas/files/2017_report_equality_women_men_in_the_eu_en.pdf       


  
7 
➢ Ensure gender parity8 within the public sector through various means, such as 
setting quotas or giving preference to female candidates during the recruitment 
process.9 Such measures will be in place as long as necessary, up until the desired 
outcome has been achieved. 
 
➢ Make reporting on gender representation mandatory at all levels of 
government, whether at the national, local, or regional level. This will draw 
attention to the lack of female representation. Public reporting can also prompt 
change due to possible reputational risks. 
 
3. In the workplace 
 
➢ All mid-sized to large businesses should be required to disclose and report 
on gender balance and the gender pay gap. Across the EU, wage gaps between 
genders are still at 16.0%.10 Greater transparency on gender pay gaps will aid in 
addressing gender inequality in the workplace and ensuring women's 
representation at all levels throughout companies. Gender reporting increases 
accountability and drives action towards more inclusive and fairer policies. Volt 
is proposing: 
○ In the short term, mid-sized to large companies (more than 100 
employees) will be required to disclose how much they pay male and 
female staff in terms of salaries and bonuses,11 and in the medium term 
they will be obliged to obtain a government certificate demonstrating pay 
equality.12 Failure to comply will result in fines. 
○ Businesses will have to disclose gender balance across the company in 
their annual financial statements, including the number of women in 
senior management positions, from the moment the legislation comes 
into effect.  
○ Every state-owned company, regardless of its size, ought to disclose its 
gender balance across the whole enterprise in the short term. All state-
owned companies will also have to produce a report demonstrating equal 
pay on an annual basis. 
 
8 The process to achieve, and the exact definition of, gender parity can vary depending on 
circumstances, and requires constant monitoring to measure progress made towards the goal. 
9 Following the example of Germany, see Global Government Forum, Women Leaders Index Gender 
Equality Case Study. See Germany, available at https://www.globalgovernmentforum.com/women-
leaders-index-gender-equality-germany-case-study/  
10 Eurostats, “Gender pay gap statistics”, available at http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-
explained/index.php/Gender_pay_gap_statistics     
11 Following the example of Germany, see The Financial Times, German employers forced to reveal 
gender pay gap, available at https://www.ft.com/content/e9f618c0-f210-11e7-ac08-07c3086a2625   
12 Following the example of Iceland. See The Independent, Iceland makes it illegal to pay men more 
than women, available at http://www.independent.co.uk/news/business/news/iceland-gender-pay-gap-
illegal-men-pay-more-women-income-salary-earn-a8139141.html  
and Government of Iceland, Equal Pay Certification, available at 
https://www.government.is/topics/human-rights-and-equality/equal-pay-certification/ 


  
8 
○ Sanction companies that do not extend to each individual the same 
benefits, salaries, opportunities for training or promotion because of 
their gender identity, and include reference to non-discrimination on 
these grounds in any vacancy announcements. 
 
➢ Set a 40% quota for women on the boards of all publicly traded 
enterprises.13 In 2018, the average female representation on European boards 
stood at 33.614. This measure will not only positively impact the performance of 
companies, but will also lead to an increased number of women across the 
company as a whole. 
○ All companies that are publicly traded on a stock market15 will be required 
to have 40% female representation on their corporate boards by 
midterm. Failure to comply with this regulation will result in heavy fines, 
suspended remuneration of board members, and/or a possible delisting 
from the market. 
○ Existing companies will be given a five-year timeframe to achieve the 
quota, while newly listed companies will be required to comply with the 
requirement at the time of listing.16 
 
➢ State-owned companies should act as role models. State-owned companies 
ought to have 50% female representation on their corporate boards by midterm. 
 
➢ Incentivise He For She programmes: make men part of the solution, not the 
problem. Volt believes that all parties need to participate in the conversation 
for a solution to evolve. For this reason, it is necessary to encourage more 
dialogue and to create initiatives in the workplace, consisting of men supporting 
good practises and sensitising others to the issues. Those can and should take 
various forms: men attending women’s meetings to take part in discussions, 
 
13 In 2010, the EU Commission published the ‘Strategy for equality between women and men 2010-
2015’ initiative, challenging gender diversity and equality. See European Commission, Strategy for 
equality between women and men 2010-2015, available at http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=LEGISSUM:em0037&from=EN. The matter has recently been reopened by 
the current commissioner for justice and gender equality. See The Guardian, EU to push for 40% quota 
for women on company boards, available at https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/nov/20/eu-to-
push-for-40-quota-for-women-on-company-boards  
14 European Women on Boards, Ethics & Boards European Gender Diversity Index, available at 
https://europeanwomenonboards.eu/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/ewob_facsheet.pdf  
15 A publicly traded company, or a public company, is a company that has issued securities through an 
initial public offering and is traded on at least one stock exchange or the over-the-counter market. See 
Investopedia, Public Company, available at https://www.investopedia.com/terms/p/publiccompany.asp  
16 Germany can already fine companies EUR 50,000 for non compliance while Norway can delist a 
Company from the market. Hence, we want to learn from those best practices and have a unified 
system to achieve equality, by fining companies EUR 50,000, delisting, and suspending remuneration 
when non-compliance has been established. See  The Conversation, Lessons from Norway in Getting 
Women onto Corporate Boards available at http://theconversation.com/lessons-from-norway-in-
getting-women-onto-corporate-boards-38338;  Bredin Prat, Hengeler Mueller. Slaughter and May, 
France and Germany available at https://www.hengeler.com/fileadmin/news/BF_Letter/14_Board-
LevelGenderQuotas_2016-08.PDF 


  
9 
listen, and ask questions; men simply standing up every time a woman is treated 
in an unfair manner; or pledges consisting of men refusing to speak on a panel 
that has no women or participate in a meeting that women are not part of. 
 
➢ Require all mid-sized to large companies to have confidential channels and 
hotlines separate from general employee relations to report inappropriate 
and discriminatory behaviour, violence, and/or sexual harassment. Women 
still face sexual harassment and violence, as well as inappropriate behaviours in 
the workplace.17 Volt will require employers to have those reporting channels in 
place and have them managed by an external company or by a separate human 
resources team that includes women. 
 
➢ Introduce measures to empower women with children to have a successful 
career. The following measures will benefit all types of parents (including but 
not limited to single men, women, heterosexual and homosexual couples): 
○ Incentivise companies’ internal nurseries and working modes, enabling 
flexibility suited for each parent’s needs. 
○ Enable equal paid maternity and paternity leave for a specific period of 
time, and then extra time off that can be shared according to the parents’ 
preferences. Encourage both parents to take vacation time. The length of 
leave can be decided according to the countries’ existing frameworks, but 
equality shall prevail. 
○ Pilot more flexible “more-people-working-less” models. The sharp rise 
in productivity has created an imbalance in the labour markets. A 
reduction in individual working hours would absorb much of the structural 
unemployment that has resulted.18 
○ Implement Family Working Time following parental leave to allow 
both parents to transition back to work starting part-time, with possible 
compensation of reduced income during specific life phases (e.g. during 
early infancy as foreseen in the German Parental Leave Act)19 to better 
balance between parents’ responsibilities for family, caregiving, and 
generating income.20 This would follow parental leave and last up to three 
years. Both parents would, for example, work 80% of the full time, and 
 
17 People of other genders face some of those types of violence as well, and shall have access to the 
same channels. 
18 Jean-Marie Perbost, Work more? Work less? What should be done so that we can all work and 
perform better?, p. 48,  available at https://gef.eu/wp-
content/uploads/2017/01/Work_more_work_less.pdf  
19  BMFSFJ, Manuela Schwesig: Mütter und Väter wollen heute beides: Familie und Beruf, available at 
https://www.bmfsfj.de/bmfsfj/aktuelles/reden-und-interviews/manuela-schwesig--muetter-und-vaeter-
wollen-heute-beides--familie-und-beruf/75720?view=DEFAULT  
20  OECD,  Be Flexible! Background brief on how workplace flexibility can help European employees to 
balance work and family, available at https://www.oecd.org/els/family/Be-Flexible-Backgrounder-
Workplace-Flexibility.pdf  


  
10 
the loss of wages would be compensated with a digressive rate based on 
income level and duration.21 
 
4. In the education system 
 
➢ Educate students about the advantages and importance of having a 
discrimination-free society and workforce. For example, a diverse workforce 
is profitable for companies as it improves both levels of productivity and 
employment. 
 
➢ Incentivize girls and women to enter careers in which they are often 
underrepresented. This could be done in many ways, including by setting up 
state-sponsored ‘summer camps’ for sectors that are generally dominated by 
men to incentivise equal representation in younger generations. This would 
provide an opportunity for women to familiarise themselves with possible 
careers and/or studies. 
 
➢ Have internal bias training for professionals in the education system, 
including teachers and professors, to ensure that girls and women have the 
same chances and opportunities as others, and that they are not steered towards 
particular careers. 
 
5. Combating period poverty 
 
Menstrual hygiene is not a choice or a luxury, but a necessity that should be treated 
accordingly in the context of society, charity, and taxation. Volt is committed to 
combating period poverty and achieving greater equality through access to free 
menstrual products. Therefore, this policy focuses on enabling access to free 
menstrual products such as tampons and pads in public buildings. 
 
➢ Governments and local administrations ensure the distribution of free 
menstrual products to schools and other educational institutions, prisons, 
hospitals, food banks, homeless shelters, women's shelters, and similar facilities, 
as well as to public toilets. The primary aim should be to ensure free access to 
sanitary pads. 
 
➢ Handling in public spaces: Depending on local conditions, either hygiene items 
are provided in all rooms or easily and generally, access is made possible. For 
example, in a common, protected anteroom for all genders. It is important here 
that “all rooms” also include male toilets and disabled-friendly toilets. 
 
 
21  FES (Ed.), Müller, Neumann, Wrolich, Familienarbeitszeit, available at http://library.fes.de/pdf-
files/dialog/10335.pdf  


  
11 
➢ Proper education and awareness-raising on healthy menstrual hygiene and the 
removal of taboos are an important part of the fight against period poverty. 
Everyone should have access to knowledge to develop an understanding of how 
to deal with periods. Also, Volt is committed to educating menstruating persons 
through schools and doctors about possible alternatives to hygienic pads and 
tampons. This will provide an opportunity for the use of environmentally-
friendly and healthy hygiene products. 
 
➢ Volt supports and promotes initiatives such as the EU Ecolabel for hygiene 
products to increase the production and consumption of hygiene products with 
a lower environmental impact. Every menstruating person should be entitled to a 
free menstrual cup from a gynaecologist every three years. 
 
B. Protect the human and civil rights of LGBTIQ+  people 
 
Volt is based on the principles of equality for all, equal opportunities, and respect for 
human rights. Individuals who are lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, intersex, and 
queer (LGBTIQ+) are subject to discriminatory practices, violence, harassment, and so 
much more in every realm of their lives. Each LGBTIQ+ individual faces different 
challenges and has different needs; there is no one-size-fits-all policy. Volt aims to 
introduce regulations and concrete actions to achieve equality in law and in practise for 
all. By this, we don’t mean an abstract concept of equality but pure equality; we will 
settle for nothing less. We want to ensure that LGBTIQ+ people have access to the 
same rights and protections as others. It is also key to eliminate all forms of 
discrimination, whether in the private or public sphere, through education, incentives 
in the workplace, etc. In short, love is love, and it’s that simple. 
 
1. In the law 
 
➢ Legalise marriage for all. Unfortunately, in many countries in Europe, some 
people cannot yet get married because of the gender of the person they love.22 
The fact that other types of partnerships exist and are available does not mean 
that this is acceptable in any way. This is why Volt will work to legalise marriage 
for all across the European Union where it is not already the case, in order for 
heterosexual and homosexual couples to have access to the exact same rights, 
procedures, and union in the eyes of the state.23 
 
➢ Legalise adoption for same-sex couples. So many children need families, and 
so many families—or individuals—want children. The only criteria that should 
matter is whether one can and will provide a safe and loving environment for a 
 
22 Marriage for same-sex couple is legal in Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, 
Iceland, Ireland, Luxembourg, Norway, the Netherlands, Portugal, Malta, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, 
Switzerland and the UK. 
23  It is necessary to stress that this is not an affront to religion: Volt stands for secular states; as a 
result is talking about civil rights and union in front of the state, and not religious ones.   


  
12 
child. Equality means that all should have the same rights, including the right to 
adopt a child. No, same-sex parents are not less able to raise a child than 
heterosexual ones. No, a child does not need both a maternal and a paternal 
figure. Otherwise, how could we explain that so many children raised by single 
parents or by homosexual parents are like everybody else? Otherwise, how could 
we justify letting single parents raise children alone? For these reasons, Volt will 
work to: 
○ Every adult (regardless of their gender identity, sexual orientation, or 
marital status) has the opportunity to adopt a child based on the same 
criteria as those imposed for adoption on heterosexual couples 
according to local law. 
○ ensure that the procedure will be the same as for heterosexual 
couples. Homosexual couples and single parents should not have to jump 
through any additional hoops to be able to adopt. No discrimination 
should take place on the basis of a parent’s gender identity, sexual 
orientation, or marital status. 
 
➢ Guarantee transgender rights: 
○ Make gender affirming procedures, such as hormone treatment, 
surgery, and psychological support, accessible for transgender people, 
and ensure that they are reimbursed by public health insurance 
schemes.24 
○ Challenge legislation that requires transgender individuals to do the 
following to change their gender legally: undergo medical procedures 
(such laws are still present in 23 countries in Europe and need to be 
challenged rapidly),25 or be diagnosed as mentally ill. 
○ Ensure that people are able to use the facilities linked to their own gender 
identification (e.g. bathrooms). 
 
➢ Guarantee intersex rights:26 
○ Prohibit 
medically 
unnecessary 
“sex-normalising” 
surgery, 
sterilisation and other treatments performed on intersex babies and 
 
24 See for example NHS, Gender Dysphoria, available at  https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/gender-
dysphoria/treatment/#surgery 
25 Amnesty International, Sexual and reproductive rights, available at 
https://www.amnesty.org/en/what-we-do/sexual-and-reproductive-rights/; Malta, Norway, Denmark, 
Ireland, Portugal and Belgium are the only European nations that allow a change of gender without 
medical or state intervention. See Reuters, Portugal approves law to boost transgender rights, protect 
intersex infants, available at https://www.reuters.com/article/portugal-lgbt-lawmaking/portugal-
approves-law-to-boost-transgender-rights-protect-intersex-infants-idUSL1N1RQ0ZP  
And for the general status of the issue in Europe see Heinrich Boell Stiftung, Because I would have to 
be Sterilized, available at https://www.boell.de/en/2018/11/26/because-i-would-have-be-sterilized 
26 “The intersex definition is a person is born with a combination of male and female biological 
characteristics, such as chromosomes or genitals, that can make it difficult for doctors to assign their 
sex as distinctly male or female.” See Planned Parenthood, What is intersex, available at 
https://www.plannedparenthood.org/learn/sexual-orientation-gender/gender-gender-identity/whats-
intersex  


  
13 
children without their informed consent.27 Such treatment shall be 
deferred “until such time as the child is able to participate in the decision,” 
unless there is a risk to the child's life.28 As of April 2018, Malta and 
Portugal are the only countries in the world to ban medically unnecessary 
surgery on the genitals of intersex infants. 
○ Ensure that there are no administrative obstacles for intersex 
individuals in being recognized, getting necessary administrative 
papers, etc. Gender markers in identity documents and birth registries 
should be reviewed to better protect intersex people (see point below).29 
 
➢ Promote legislation that allows non-binary people to choose their gender on 
IDs, forms, and official documents (as X or Q, for example). Add the use of 
singular “they” instead of only  “he or she” or “he/she” in documents and forms. 
States could also consider making the registration of one’s gender optional on 
birth certificates and other identity documents.30 
 
➢ Promote and revise legislation that addresses persistent discrimination 
against LGBTIQ+ people. While legislation is in place to tackle discrimination, it 
is essential to increase its visibility and revise laws where necessary. 
 
Ensure that adequate deterrents, such as fines and criminal penalties, are in 
place and applied when acts of violence (hate crimes) or discrimination take 
place because of a person’s orientation, sexuality, and/or gender.31 
 
➢ Conduct training for the police on hate crimes against LGBTIQ+ people.32 
 
2. In the public sector  
 
 
27 The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, PACE calls for a ban on 'sex-normalising' 
surgery for intersex children, available at https://pace.coe.int/en/news/6777/call-for-a-ban-on-sex-
normalising-surgery-for-intersex-children 
28 See previous footnote.  
29 European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights, The fundamental rights situation of intersex 
people, available at http://fra.europa.eu/en/publication/2015/fundamental-rights-situation-intersex-
people       
30 ILGA Europe, Non-binary registrations models in Europe, available at https://www.ilga-
europe.org/sites/default/files/non-binary_gender_registration_models_in_europe_0.pdf      
31 Following the example of France. See Connexion France, French racial discrimination fines rise up to 
15 00 available at https://www.connexionfrance.com/French-news/French-racial-discrimination-fines-
rise-up-to-15-000   
Additionally on compliance measures for non-dircrimination laws see European Commission, A 
comparative analysis of non-discrimination law in Europe 2017 (p. 125), available at 
https://publications.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/36c9bb78-db01-11e7-a506-
01aa75ed71a1 
32 As recommended by the Council of Europe. See Council of Europe, Policing Hate Crime against LGBTI 
persons: Training for a Professional Police Response, available at https://rm.coe.int/prems-030717-gbr-
2575-hate-crimes-against-lgbti-web-a4/1680723b1d  


  
14 
➢ Ensure that countries lead by example and apply inclusive and equal policies 
to actively contribute towards real equality. Comprehensive strategies are 
needed to address the issues, with a broad range of measures that could be used 
to accomplish this goal. 
○ Implement comprehensive programmes to encourage minorities to get 
into politics and support them once there, through training courses, 
mentoring, public campaigns, and other means. 
○ Educate the public about the benefits of diversity in political decision 
making. 
 
➢ Train judges, magistrates, and other civil servants to recognise and address 
implicit biases towards minorities. The justice system is vital to ensuring that 
disputes are resolved in an orderly manner and that victims are protected. 
Through training and other methods, Volt wants to reinstate confidence in the 
justice system and ensure that biases towards minorities are maintained at a 
minimum, if not eliminated, through training and other methods. 
 
3. In the workplace 
 
➢ Sanction companies that do not extend to each individual the same benefits, 
salaries, opportunities for hiring, training, or promotion regardless of one’s 
sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, or sex characteristics, 
and include reference to non-discrimination on these grounds in vacancy 
announcements. 
 
➢ Require all mid-sized to large companies to have confidential channels and 
hotlines, separate from general employee relations, to report inappropriate 
and discriminatory behaviour, violence, and/or sexual harassment. Volt will 
require employers to have reporting channels in place that are managed by an 
external company or by a separate human resources team.33 
 
➢ Incentivise companies to train staff—especially managers—to raise 
awareness of issues faced by their LGBTIQ+ colleagues. 
 
 
33 These channels will be accessible to all.  


  
15 
➢ Provide incentives to companies to ensure that they address the specific 
rights of transgender34 and intersex35 people at work. 
○ Companies should adopt policies for trans inclusion, including the 
recognition of the gender identity of trans staff, customers, and other 
stakeholders, regardless of whether this is reflected in official documents 
(which includes establishing policies that require company staff to respect 
the name, pronouns, terms, and gender used by the person concerned). 
○ Companies should ensure safe and non-discriminatory access to 
bathrooms and other single-sex facilities, as well as non-discriminatory 
dress codes. 
○ Companies also need to adopt policies to respect the rights of intersex 
people at work, including access to personal services and changing rooms, 
dress codes, healthcare and medical attention. 
 
4. In the education system 
 
➢ Cover all subjects in sexual education classes. Education is key to eliminating 
inequalities and unfair treatments and to fostering a culture of mutual 
understanding and acceptance. It is important to make sure that, in a safe 
learning environment36, they have access to the information and resources that 
concern them, their classmates, and the rest of the world. For this reason, Volt 
will advocate for a European educational standard in sex education: 
○ Not only should heterosexuality be discussed, but also all other types of 
sexual orientations and gender identities (for example, what it means to 
be non-binary, cisgender, transgender, or intersex). 
○ Methods of contraception and protection are explained and discussed. 
 
34 “Some people feel that the sex they were assigned at birth doesn’t match their gender identity, or 
the gender that they feel they are inside. These people are often called transgender.” See Planned 
Parenthood, Trans and Gender Nonconforming Identities, available at  
https://www.plannedparenthood.org/learn/sexual-orientation-gender/trans-and-gender-
nonconforming-identities; “An umbrella term for people whose gender identity and/or expression is 
different from cultural expectations based on the sex they were assigned at birth. Being transgender 
does not imply any specific sexual orientation. Therefore, transgender people may identify as straight, 
gay, lesbian, bisexual, etc.” See Human Rights Campaign, Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity 
Definitions, available at 
https://www.hrc.org/resources/sexual-orientation-and-gender-identity-terminology-and-definitions   
35 “The intersex definition is: Intersex people are born with some biological characteristics that are 
considered “female” and others that are considered “male.” Being intersex is a naturally occurring 
variation in humans, and isn’t a medical problem. It’s also more common than most people realize. It’s 
hard to know exactly how many people are intersex, but estimates suggest that about 1 in 100 people 
born in the U.S. is intersex.” See Planned Parenthood, Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity 
Definitions, available at 
https://www.plannedparenthood.org/learn/sexual-orientation-gender/gender-gender-identity/whats-
intersex  
36 Follow the International Technical Guidance on Sexuality Education set up by UNESCO. See UNESCO 
and SGDs, International technical guidance on sexuality education, available at 
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0026/002607/260770e.pdf  


  
16 
○ All of the above is to be done without shaming, false explanations, and 
religious commentary, and in a way that is non-discriminatory and 
inclusive. 
 
➢ Educate students about the advantages and importance of having a 
discrimination-free society and workforce. For example, a diverse workforce 
is profitable for companies as it improves both levels of productivity and 
employment. 
 
 
C. Protect the human and civil rights with regards to ethnicity, 
national origin, descent and skin colour 
 
Current legal instruments at the national, European, and international level fail to 
protect individuals facing prejudice, unequal treatment, and social exclusion. Minorities 
still experience discriminatory treatment and hate crimes, including in education, 
employment, social services, interaction with law enforcement, etc. Discrimination 
based on ethnicity and skin colour remains one of the most experienced forms of 
inequality, with these minorities remaining the most disadvantaged and persecuted 
individuals in society.37 Additionally, discrimination against Roma people is particularly 
problematic across Europe. Roma people represent the largest ethnic minority in 
Europe; it is estimated that there are 10–12 million Roma people in total, some 6 million 
of whom live in the EU and most of whom hold the citizenship of an EU country.38 
Recent publications show that as many as 80% of Roma are still at risk of poverty.39 
 
 
1. In the law 
 
➢ Promote and revise legislation that addresses persistent discrimination 
against certain groups. While legislation is in place to tackle discrimination, it is 
essential to increase its visibility and revise it where necessary. 
○ Ensure that adequate deterrents, such as fines and criminal penalties, are 
in place and applied when acts of violence (hate crimes) or discrimination 
take place due to someone’s ethnicity, national origin, descent, or skin 
colour.40 
 
37 Fighting discrimination on the ground of race and ethnic origin, available at   
https://equineteurope.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/equinet_discussion_paper_final_-_web-
2.pdf 
38 European Commission, Roma integration in EU countries, available at 
https://ec.europa.eu/info/strategy/justice-and-fundamental-rights/discrimination/roma-and-eu/roma-
integration-eu-countries_en    
39 European Commission, Roma inclusion: More effort needed to improve access to schooling and 
employment, available at http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-17-2961_en.htm  
40 Following the example of France. See Connexion France, French racial discrimination fines rise up to 
15 00 available at https://www.connexionfrance.com/French-news/French-racial-discrimination-fines-
rise-up-to-15-000   


  
17 
○ Immediately remove any exceptions which permit discrimination on these 
grounds. 
 
➢ Strengthen law enforcement systems in order to end police violence, 
harassment, and profiling and ensure that the police fulfil their duty to 
protect society. The police practise of ethnic profiling41 still exists in most 
countries (e.g. in France, young men perceived as black or Arab are 20 times more 
likely to be stopped than the rest of the population).42 Recent statistics show 
that in 2017, almost half of those who were stopped by the police believed that 
this was due to their immigrant or ethnic minority background.43 Volt therefore 
proposes to work to: 
○ End ethnic profiling during police identity checks and require officers to 
issue a stop form for every identity check, to encourage well-grounded 
stops and greater accountability. 
○ Limit officers’ discretionary authority by requiring reasonable and 
individualised suspicion for all checks and searches and developing clear 
guidance for law enforcement officers. 
 
➢ End police violence through training, accountability mechanisms, and 
monitoring. 
 
➢ Remove the terms "race", "racism", and "racial discrimination" from all 
legislation. The current concept of different races is socially constructed, as 
scientifically there is only one human race (Homo sapiens).44 The use of such 
terms should therefore be eliminated in the law and the concept should be 
redefined. On this merit, policies against discrimination shall consist of the 
following terms: ethnicity, national origin, descent, or skin colour. N.B. Volt does 
not dispute the fact that “racism” - in the traditional meaning of the word  - exists 
 
Additionally on compliance measures for non-dircrimination laws see European Commission, A 
comparative analysis of non-discrimination law in Europe 2017 (p. 125), available at 
https://publications.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/36c9bb78-db01-11e7-a506-
01aa75ed71a1 
41 Ethnic profiling consists of “the use by the police, with no objective and reasonable justification, of 
grounds such as race, colour, languages, religion, nationality or national or ethnic origin in control, 
surveillance or investigation activities”. See European Commission against Racism and Intolerance 
(ECRI), ‘General Policy Recommendation No 11 on Combating Racism and Racial Discrimination in 
Policing’ (p. 4), available at https://rm.coe.int/ecri-general-policy-recommendation-no-11-on-
combating-racism-and-racia/16808b5adf 
42 Human Rights Watch, France: the Human Rights Implications of the Presidential Campaign, available 
at https://www.hrw.org/news/2017/03/29/france-human-rights-implications-presidential-campaign   
43 European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights, Second European Union Minorities and 
Discrimination Survey - Main results, available at http://fra.europa.eu/en/publication/2017/eumidis-ii-
main-results       
44 A concept or perception of something based on the collective views developed and maintained 
within a society or social group; a social phenomenon or convention originating within and cultivated by 
society or a particular social group, as opposed to existing inherently or naturally. See  Oxford living 
dictionary, Social construct, available at https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/social_construct  


  
18 
and needs to end, but believes that acknowledging that all humans are of one race 
is a key factor in ending discrimination. 
 
2. In the public sector  
 
➢ Ensure that countries lead by example and apply inclusive and equal policies 
to actively contribute towards real equality. Comprehensive strategies are 
needed to address the issues with a broad range of measures, such as: 
○ Implementing comprehensive programmes to encourage minorities to 
get into politics and support them once in, through training courses, 
mentoring, public campaigns, and other means. 
○ Educating the public about the benefits of diversity in political decision 
making. 
 
➢ Train judges, magistrates, and other civil servants to recognise and address 
implicit biases towards minorities. The justice system is vital to ensuring that 
disputes are resolved in an orderly manner and that victims are protected. 
Across Europe, people who are, or seem to be, from minority groups linked to 
their ethnicity or skin colour are still more likely to face arrest, charging, 
prosecution or imprisonment.45 It is therefore essential for judges, magistrates 
and other civil servants to demonstrate fairness and justice when carrying out 
their responsibilities. Volt wants to restore confidence in the justice system and 
ensure that biases towards minorities are maintained at a minimum, if not 
eliminated, through training and other methods. 
 
 
3. In the workplace  
 
➢ Increase ethnic and cultural diversity in companies across the continent. 
Achieving greater diversity is not only the right thing to do but is also profitable 
for companies; it is more likely to bring competitive advantage to a company and 
is linked to higher financial returns.46 Volt wants to ensure that both the private 
and public sectors respect and promote diversity and encourage the minority 
workforce to enter careers in which they are underrepresented. 
 
➢ Motivate and encourage the minority workforce to enter careers in which 
they are underrepresented. 
 
 
45 For example, a recent report found that in the UK, people from black, Asian and minority ethnic 
backgrounds are more likely to be jailed for certain crimes than those who are white. See UK Ministry of 
Justice, Race and the criminal justice system 2016, available at 
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/race-and-the-criminal-justice-system-2016 
46 McKinsey & Company, Why Diversity Matters (p.3), available at 
https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/people-and-organizational-performance/our-insights/why-
diversity-matters 


  
19 
➢ Require all mid-sized to large companies to have confidential channels and 
hotlines, separate from general employee relations, to report inappropriate, 
discriminatory, and inappropriate behaviour, violence, and/or harassment. 
Workplace discrimination can take many forms. It occurs during recruitment and 
interviews and is reflected in unequal pay, unjustified dismissals, and 
harassment.47 Volt will require employers to have those reporting channels in 
place and have them managed by an external company or by a separate human 
resources team. 
 
➢ Perform temporary positive discrimination (e.g., special practises aimed at 
fostering equality: “supporting groups of people who face, or have faced, 
entrenched discrimination so they can have similar access to opportunities as 
others in the community”)48 to speed up economic, social, and cultural 
integration. 
 
4. In the education system 
 
➢ Incentivise and protect diversity in schools to promote better educational 
opportunities. Promoting diversity in schools has several advantages, including 
educational benefits and the promotion of good relations between people of 
different backgrounds.49 Volt wants school curricula to better incorporate 
diversity. For example, through cross-cultural exchange, the study of books by 
authors from different backgrounds and with different perspectives, through 
workshops, and by using more practical pedagogical tools. Additionally, provide 
internal erasmus opportunities within different regions of the country to 
diminish regional differences. 
 
5. Systematic equality of opportunities 
➢ Close the gaps between discriminated groups and the population at large 
and ensure real equality of opportunities. Systematic differences in health 
outcomes, housing situation, income, and environmental conditions between 
discriminated groups and the population at large warrant positive action in 
closing those gaps and ensuring real equality of opportunities. 
○ Governments and local governments should make sure that quality of 
housing is systematically the same with what concerns climate standards 
across social groups.”  
 
6. Protect human and civil rights of Roma people 
 
 
47 Equinet, Fighting Discrimination on the Ground of Race and Ethnic Origin, available at 
https://equineteurope.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/equinet_discussion_paper_final_-_web-
2.pdf 
48 Australian Human Rights Commission, Positive Discrimination, available at  
https://www.humanrights.gov.au/quick-guide/12078  
49 ATL, Race Equality and Education: A practical resource for the School Workforce, available at 
https://www.atl.org.uk/Images/Race%20equality%20and%20education.pdf  


  
20 
➢ Ensure that Roma people have equal rights, both in the legal system and in 
practice, and that no more discrimination is tolerated. For this, ensure that 
they have equal access to education, housing, employment, and healthcare.50 
○ Ensure that people are not evicted during the winter, and advocate for a 
school year truce on expulsions to allow children to stay in school. 
○ Create awareness-raising campaigns about the Roma community to 
decrease stigma. 
○ Ensure equal access for Roma children to public schools, regardless of 
living situations. For this, eliminate administrative hurdles (such as 
requiring children to live in the neighbourhood of the school in order to 
be able to register there). 
○ Ensure that Roma people have access to basic infrastructure and human 
needs such as running water, electricity, and heating. 
○ Incentivise programmes at the local level to help tackle issues Roma 
people most commonly face, including language classes, courses and 
training to help find employment, assistance in getting the right 
information on entitlements and access to healthcare, etc. 
 
 
D. Protect the human and civil rights with regards to religion 
or belief 
 
Every individual has the right to freedom of thought, conscience, and religion, as long 
as it does not restrict or violate the rights and freedoms of others. Religious 
discrimination is an unjustified act against an individual on the basis of their religion or 
belief. Such an act can be a direct form of violence or harassment, or indirect, where 
policies and practises place certain populations at a disadvantage. Despite a diverse 
European society, discrimination on these grounds still persists. For example, two in 
every five European Muslims experience discrimination in their workplace, housing, and 
when accessing social services. One third claim verbal abuse.51 Volt believes that 
religion is a free choice and should be respected by others. Discrimination on the 
grounds of religion or belief includes the absence of a religion or belief, such as 
atheism. 
 
Volt also believes in a secular state and will work to ensure that such principles are 
respected across the European Union. 
 
 
 
50 These provisions are based on the European Commission’s EU Framework for National Roma 
Integration Strategies which aims to close the gap between Roma and non-Roma in these four key 
areas. See European Commission, An EU Framework for National Roma Integration Strategies up to 
2020, available at http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A52011DC0173    
51The Guardian, Two in five European Muslims have felt discriminated against, available at 
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/sep/21/two-in-five-european-muslims-have-felt-
discriminated-against-survey  


  
21 
1. In the law 
 
➢ Promote and revise legislation that addresses persistent discrimination 
against certain groups. While legislation is in place to tackle discrimination, it is 
essential to increase its visibility and revise it where necessary. 
○ Ensure that adequate deterrents, such as fines and criminal penalties, are 
in place and applied when acts of violence (hate crimes) or discrimination 
take place due to someone’s religious beliefs and practices. 
○ Immediately remove any exceptions which permit discrimination on these 
grounds. 
 
➢ Strengthen law enforcement systems in order to end police violence, 
harassment, and profiling and to ensure that the police fulfils their duty to 
protect society. Conduct training for the police on hate crimes against 
minorities. 
 
➢ Guarantee freedom of expression and religion, as long as it does not prevent 
others from exercising and enjoying their rights and human rights are respected. 
Balance national security concerns and personal freedoms, only restricting the 
latter when strictly necessary. 
 
2. In the public sector  
 
➢ Ensure that countries lead by example and apply inclusive and equal policies 
to actively contribute towards real equality. Comprehensive strategies are 
needed to address the issues, with a broad range of measures, such as training, 
overcoming stereotypes, etc. 
○ Implement comprehensive programmes to encourage minorities to get 
into politics and support them once there, through training courses, 
mentoring, public campaigns, and other means. 
○ Educate the public about the benefits of diversity in political decision-
making. 
 
➢ Train judges, magistrates, and other civil servants to recognise and address 
implicit biases towards minorities. The justice system is vital to ensure that 
disputes are resolved in an orderly manner and that victims are protected. 
Through training and other methods, Volt wants to reinstate confidence in the 
justice system and ensure that biases towards minorities are maintained at a 
minimum, if not eliminated, through training and other methods. 
 
3. In the workplace 
 
➢ Require all mid-sized to large companies to have confidential channels and 
hotlines, separate from general employee relations, to report inappropriate and 
discriminatory behaviour, violence, and/or sexual harassment. Volt will require 


  
22 
employers to put such reporting channels in place and have them managed by 
an external company or by a separate human resources team. 
 
➢ Ensure that no discrimination on the grounds of religion or belief takes place 
in the workplace. Workplace policies in both the private and public sectors 
should not restrict religious rights. This includes the right to wear religious 
symbols and clothing,52 for example, the right of a woman to cover her hair, and 
other practices. Volt believes that no employer should have the right to tell 
individuals not to wear religious symbols,53 unless necessary for health and 
safety reasons (hereby countering the recent Court of Justice of the European 
Union judgement).54 
 
➢ Guarantee freedom of expression, including the right to practise one’s religion, 
as long as it does not deprive others from exercising and enjoying their rights 
and human rights are respected. 
 
➢ Ensure that during application processes for employment, candidates are 
not discriminated against because of their religion. This includes ensuring 
that job descriptions do not use discriminatory language and avoiding 
references to personal characteristics. During the recruitment process, 
individuals should not be required to disclose their religion. Mechanisms should 
be in place to ensure that individuals can make a complaint if discrimination 
occurs during the recruitment process. 
 
4. In the education system 
 
➢ Volt will advocate for a European educational standard where public school 
funding is not used for religious classes or activities and that students from 
all religious (or non-religious) backgrounds can attend. 
 
➢ Ideally, schools should be a religion-neutral environment that allows 
students and teachers to express their own religion. Promote learning 
experiences: 
○ In the event that schools provide civics classes in which religion is 
discussed, ensure that they include all (or the highest possible number of) 
 
52 Examples of religious clothing are religious headscarves, face-covering veils, turbans and skull caps, 
while crucifixes, kara bangles, kirpans (ceremonial daggers) and certain religious jewellery can be seen 
as examples of religious symbols. See European Commission, Religious clothing and symbols in 
employment, available at 
https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/just/document.cfm?action=display&doc_id=48810  
53 However, no religious symbol that could be used as a weapon should be brought to the workplace.  
54 CURIA, An internal rule of an undertaking which prohibits the visible wearing of any political, 
philosophical or religious sign does not constitute direct discrimination, available at 
https://curia.europa.eu/jcms/upload/docs/application/pdf/2017-03/cp170030en.pdf  


  
23 
religions, not only the dominant one. This policy does not include 
theological faculties in higher education. 
○ Foster cross-cultural exchanges, with workshops and visits to religious 
sites, and more practical pedagogical tools. 
 
➢ Educate students about the advantages and importance of having a 
discrimination-free society and workforce. Teachers should present diversity 
as a positive element of human life. 
 
➢ Allow children to wear religious symbols as long as they are doing so of their 
own free will. 
 
5. Protect human and civil rights of the Jewish people 
(Antisemitism) 
 
➢ A clear voice against all kinds of antisemitism, at all times, both to the outside 
world and within Volt. Based on the Working Definition of Antisemitism55 from 
the 
International 
Holocaust 
Remembrance 
Alliance. 
 
➢ Supporting organisations that fight all forms of hatred (including racism, 
ableism, homophobia, and transphobia), but especially antisemitism. 
 
➢ Promoting active participation in learning and teaching about the rich history 
of Jewish life in Europe, as well as establishing a positive image of Europe as a 
welcoming place for people of all faiths and ethnicities. 
➢ Development of conceptual security measures, in cooperation with Jewish 
institutions and the security organs, e.g. year-round support of security detail 
around Jewish institutions with special attention to high risk situations, 
including, cooperation with local law enforcement to coordinate security 
measures according to the actual threat level. 
➢ Fixed establishment of Antisemitism representatives, both at the European and 
national levels - an exemplary best practice for this would be the designation of 
such a commissioner for Germany56. 
➢ Cooperation and extensive expansion of the various reporting offices for 
antisemitic incidents and crimes. 
➢ When future European armed forces are established, extend Jewish military 
pastoral care, as is already the case for other religions in several armies. 
➢ Recognising Yiddish and Ladino as official EU minority languages, as is already 
the case in several EU member states (France, Sweden and Romania). 
 
55 
https://www.holocaustremembrance.com/resources/working-definitions-charters/working-
definition-antisemitism 
56 Cf. “Federal Government Commissioner for Jewish Life in Germany and the Fight against Anti-
Semitism”, https://www.bmi.bund.de/EN/ministry/commissioners/anti-semitism/anti-semitism-
node.html 
(2021-03-01) 


  
24 
 
 
 
 


  
25 
III. Alleviate Poverty  
 
In 2017, there were 112.8 million people in the EU-28 who lived in households at risk of 
poverty or social exclusion (AROPE), equivalent to 22.4% of the entire population.57 
The EU is the second largest economy in the world in 2019 with a cumulated GDP of 
more than $18.7 billion, and as such, the EU has the necessary resources to significantly 
reduce poverty and poverty risk in order to eventually eradicate it.58 
 
 
A. Overall issues linked to Poverty 
 
With almost 1 out of every 4 Europeans59 facing poverty or social exclusion, and with 
climate change poised to have an increasingly negative effect on people’s well-being, 
there is a pressing need to meet the goals set out by the European short-term strategy 
that aims to have at least “20 million fewer people in – or at risk of – poverty and social 
exclusion”.60 The Strategy further aims to drop the number of Europeans in poverty and 
at risk of poverty or social exclusion to less than 100 million in the mid-term and to less 
than 50 million in the long term. Social benefits are essential and should be designed 
to help the most vulnerable. However, they do not represent a long-term solution for 
alleviating poverty. Therefore, the main focus of Volt’s policy consists of equipping 
everyone with the tools they need in order to have access to equal opportunities and 
fully participate in society. 
 
1. Social benefits and healthcare 
 
➢ Ensure that social benefits guarantee a basic standard of life (taking into 
account housing, food, clothing, healthcare, professional programmes, etc. in a 
given region) and cover a broad set of measures. Use social benefits as a 
transitory measure, aiming to support people to get back on their feet and 
provide for themselves. 
 
➢ Introduce a monthly child benefits scheme and send young parents a welcome 
box for their newborn child. In Finland, such a measure contributed to one of the 
lowest infant mortality rates in history (e.g., new parents get to send a starter 
kit of clothes, sheets, and toys, and the box of the package can even be used as 
 
57 Eurostat, People at risk of poverty and social exclusion, available at 
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-
explained/index.php/People_at_risk_of_poverty_or_social_exclusion.  
58 International Monetary Fund: Report for Selected Countries and Subjects, available at: 
https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2019/01/weodata/weorept.aspx?sy=2019&ey=2019&scsm=
1&ssd=1&sort=country&ds=.&br=1&pr1.x=48&pr1.y=12&c=998&s=NGDPD%2CPPPGDP%2CPPPPC&grp
=1&a=1 
59 European Commission, Europe 2020 strategy, available at 
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/en/web/products-statistical-books/-/ks-04-19-559  
60 See previous footnote.  


  
26 
a crib). The maternity package is not to be commercially available, but available 
solely as a benefit offered.61 
 
➢ Ensure universal coverage and access to healthcare across Europe.62 
 
2. In-work poverty 
 
➢ Guarantee a minimum income above absolute poverty levels. Volt envisions 
universal social protection and an adequate income to become core pillars of EU 
policy making.63 In-work poverty continues to be a burden for many workers 
throughout Europe. In 2016, 9.6% of EU citizens aged 18 and older who are 
currently employed faced an in-work poverty risk.64 In other words, people are 
not remunerated sufficiently for their work, which represents a deeply unfair 
situation. 
 
➢ Venture into unconditional income: support large-scale experiments with 
unconditional basic income (UBI), to provide a solid knowledge basis to decide 
on the merits of this novel approach to social protection. 
 
3. Support for adapting and responding to climate change 
 
Volt stands for full implementation of state of the art and equitable climate resilience 
policies and strategies at all levels across the EU. This package of policies should: 
 
➢ Protect all people from extreme weather events through effective and 
prepared disaster response agencies, 
 
➢ Reward Member States, local governments, and communities for equitable 
actions, 
 
➢ Re-think urban areas to strengthen their resilience to heatwaves and floods, 
such as by expanding the retrofitting of housing to withstand better hot weather 
and the use of building materials that do not contribute to urban heat, 
 
➢ Expand effective fire hazard measures and agencies 
 
 
61  Finnish maternity boxes have been available since the 1930s, and provide an equal start in life for all 
babies. See Kela, Maternity Package, available at http://www.kela.fi/web/en/maternitypackage.   
62 For more details see “Smart State”, “Make high quality healthcare available for everyone” 
63 For more details see “Economic Renaissance”, “Social Policies”  
64 Eurostat, In-work poverty at risk of poverty rate by age and sex, available at 
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-
explained/index.php?title=EU_statistics_on_income_and_living_conditions_(EU-SILC)_methodology_-
_in-work_poverty#Description 


  
27 
➢ Expand publicly backed insurance and support services for those hit by 
extreme weather events, 
 
➢ Push for creating and maintaining good working conditions for those working 
in industries most vulnerable to climate change, such as agriculture and 
construction, 
 
➢ Support small scale farmers to adapt better to climate change, 
 
➢ Recognise the principle of solidarity for climatic impacts that affect parts of 
the European population, which includes a climate solidarity transfer mechanism 
to transfer resources from areas least hit to areas worst hit. 
 
 
B. Social and Community Housing 
 
In the last few years, house prices have been growing faster than income in most 
Member States, with inequality and housing exclusion being mutually reinforcing.65 In 
addition to that, the presence of online booking portals (such as Airbnb) in major cities 
has affected accommodation availability and provoked a rise in rental prices.66 
At the same time, economic inequality has been growing in European societies and a 
large share of the population experiences periods of unemployment.67 Furthermore, 
job market flexibility has resulted in a widespread decrease in the security and social 
protection of workers in atypical forms of employment, with significant implications for 
access to mortgages, rental contracts, and affordable housing prices.68 
Hence, ensuring access to housing with affordable rental prices is undoubtedly an 
urgent priority, and Volt intends to tirelessly work to realise it. 
 
Volt believes that it’s crucial to acknowledge that the housing market is different from 
other markets. Land is distinguished from other forms of capital because of its unique 
characteristics: it is fixed in quantity and does not depreciate. In fact, as the population 
grows, it tends to appreciate.69 It should therefore be the role of the government to 
make sure that citizens are protected and to endow public institutions with the task of 
ensuring that housing policies are sufficiently elaborated, as access to safe, secure, 
habitable, and affordable housing is strictly interwoven with human dignity. 
 
65 Housing Europe, The State of Housing in the EU, available at 
http://www.housingeurope.eu/resource-1323/the-state-of-housing-in-the-eu-2019. This includes the 
UK, the Netherlands, Austria, Italy, Denmark, Ireland and Spain. The most significant exception is 
France, which produced 116.000 new social housing units in 2012. 
66 CNBC, Airbnb is making rents in New York City spike as owners yank units off the market, study says, 
available at https://www.cnbc.com/2018/01/31/airbnb-makes-new-york-rents-increase-says-study.html  
67 Eurostat, Income inequality in the EU, available at https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/products-
eurostat-news/-/EDN-20180426-1  
68 Eurostat, Temporary and part-time jobs on the rise in the EU, available at 
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/products-eurostat-news/-/WDN-20180813-1   
69  Ryan-Collins J., Rethinking the Economics of Land and Housing, 2017 


  
28 
 
1. A living space for everyone 
 
Volt wants to ensure that there are enough living spaces dedicated to social housing 
across Europe. Governments should guarantee that there are sufficient residential 
stocks dedicated to social housing, while promoting innovative forms of shared living 
and community-led housing. Housing policies should be tackled holistically as the right 
to a decent life is often entwined with other sensitive issues, such as those of the 
peripheries, the delicate coexistence and integration between migrants and the local 
population, the re-urbanisation of areas at risk of abandonment, and the environmental 
sustainability of buildings. 
 
➢ Ensure that there is sufficient social housing and that allocation is equally 
spread throughout the urban areas. In particular, Volt intends to: 
○ Encourage public spending oriented towards investing in the construction 
of new state-owned dwellings dedicated to recipients of social welfare. 
○ Incentivise the inclusion of private owners (both natural and legal 
persons)70 into schemes  that provide them the opportunity to entrust the 
management of their property to an association that lets it to low-income 
individuals for a rent price below the market price. The private owner’s 
revenue is guaranteed by the specifically instituted guarantee fund. This 
will ensure adequate state control against mismanagement of such 
properties.71 
○ Re-convert abandoned urban buildings and refurbish existing structures 
through public spending and, in a complementary manner, through the 
intermediary action of private associations.72 Volt indeed believes that 
the promotion of urban re-densification is a more efficient, sustainable, 
and environmentally friendly solution than urban sprawl.73 
○ Promote the uniform distribution of social housing within urban areas by 
ensuring that the distribution of social dwellings is not concentrated in 
just a few neighbourhoods but is homogeneously spread across the city 
centre and the peripheral areas.74 Volt also intends to promote the 
 
70 Hoekstra, J.,  Social Housing in the Netherlands - The Development of the Dutch Social Housing 
model, 2013, available at http://resolver.tudelft.nl/uuid:049295ca-e209-4359-ba56-3d275edb22ff  
71 Best practices in this area are provided by both the Netherlands and Italy. See previous footnote; 
and Government of the Netherlands, Rented Housing, available at 
https://www.government.nl/topics/housing/rented-housing; see Iperbole, Ama - L’Agenzia 
Metropolitana per l’Affitto, available at http://www.comune.bologna.it/casa/servizi/8:3785/2896/ 
72 An interesting example is provided by a private foundation (created by a pharmaceutical company) 
that has undertaken the task to restructure a stock of social housing in Florence. See Menarini Group 
Blog, Emergenza abitativa. A Firenze, 40 Case Popolare Ristrutturate da Menarini,  available at: 
https://www.menariniblog.it/tag/progetto-ristrutturazione-case-ristrutturate  
73 Hofmann Aguirre V. H., Redensification vs Sprawl, 2008, available at 
http://www.isocarp.net/Data/case_studies/1215.pdf  
74 A best practice in this area are Danish housing benefits where the amount given is based on income 
as well as the rent, thereby allowing people with low income to access slightly more expensive 
apartments than their salary would suggest. See Danish House Benefits Act (Boligstøtteloven) n. 174 of 


  
29 
development of basic public services in rural and peripheral areas in order 
to grant a standard of living to the inhabitants. 
 
➢ Promote community-led housing (CLH). CLH refers to specific types of living 
arrangements, such as co-housing, co-living, intergenerational housing,  co-
operative models, and community land trusts.75 This will be pursued by means 
of: 
○ Valorisation of different models of CLH to help tackle housing shortages, 
increase affordability, sustainability, and social cohesion, for more 
resilient and secure communities.76 
○ Subsidise forms of CLH. Subsidies should be offered—both to 
constructors and to private buyers—for buildings designed according to 
defined social living standards, with the aim of ensuring shared and 
affordable living spaces. Volt will work to ensure that repayable funding, 
such as low-interest loans to buy new property or to renovate an existing 
property, is made available. In particular, subsidies should apply in the 
case of change of ownership (when not connected with a change in the 
CLH nature of the dwelling), to support the diffusion of the model 
through the market. 
 
➢ Provide incentives for homeowners to offer shared social living arrangements 
to better integrate individuals at risk of marginalisation, such as lonely elderly 
 
24 February 2016, available at: https://www.retsinformation.dk/Forms/r0710.aspx?id=177442. Also see 
van Heelsum A. (for EUROFOUND), Case Study on Housing in Amsterdam, Institute for Migration and 
Ethnic Studies, 2007 
75 World Economic Forum, Is co-living an answer to the affordable housing crisis?, avalable at 
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2019/05/co-living-answer-affordable-housing-crisis/; National 
Cooperative Law Center, The Characteristics of Housing Cooperatives,  available at 
http://nationalcooperativelawcenter.com/what-is-a-housing-cooperative/the-characteristics-of-
housing-cooperatives/         
76 CLH is increasingly being established as a viable and sustainable response to the challenges of 
providing affordable housing in the context of state withdrawal, spatial and social segregation, and 
climate change. See Cooperative City,  Lessons from Community-led Housing for City-Makers Across 
Europe, available at https://cooperativecity.org/2017/10/01/lessons-from-community-led-housing/. As 
for good practices: -co-housing are not uncommon in the Netherlands, especially for elderly: Landelijke 
Vereniging Centraal Wonen, Co-Housing in the Netherlands, available at 
https://www.ic.org/directory/landelijke-vereniging-centraal-wonen/; Homify, Cohousing: De Nieuwe 
Vorm Van Wonen, available at https://www.homify.nl/ideabooks/793594/cohousing-de-nieuwe-vorm-
van-wonen -coliving is already promoted in the US, -housing cooperatives are well established in 
some countries, such as Switzerland. See  Current Concerns, Housing Cooperatives in Today’s 
Switzerland, available at http://www.voltairenet.org/IMG/pdf/CC-2012_11.pdf -intergenerational 
houses:  Best practice is in Germany where multigenerational houses have been receiving funding since 
2006. It is also implemented with EU, federal and local funding in the form of a co-financing model. See 
IFA, Intergenerational House Sharing, available at https://www.ifa-fiv.org/intergenerational-house-
sharing/; and European Commission, The multigenerational house model, available at 
https://ec.europa.eu/epale/en/blog/intergenerational-learning-multigenerational-house-model 


  
30 
people or people with intellectual disabilities. Incentives could include fiscal 
advantages through reduced taxation or subsidies.77 
 
➢ Deploy EU funds to subsidise housing policies across Europe. In particular, 
Volt 
will 
work 
towards: 
 
Integrating social and shared housing into the EU Cohesion Policy by ensuring 
that sufficient EU funds are allocated to sustainable social and shared housing 
across Member States.78 This can be achieved both by integrating affordable 
houses and shelters into the decisions for fund allocation and by providing forms 
of financial support for low-wage earners, including marginalised groups (i.e. 
migrants, Roma people, etc.) earning a low income. 
 
➢ Mitigate the “Airbnb effect”. In many touristic places, it is financially more 
attractive for house owners to rent out to tourists rather than long-term 
residents. This increases accommodation scarcity and adds up to the increasing 
prices for housing. Volt intends to regulate the use of Airbnb-kind of digital 
platforms.79 
○ Establishing limitations across Europe80 in terms of the number of days 
that a certain apartment can be rented out through such platforms.81 
○ Imposing taxation on the revenue that online booking portals gain from 
the rental cost, regardless of the country of registration of such portals.82 
 
2. Fair and efficient access to housing policies 
 
Volt aims to ensure that low-wage earners and marginalised groups have access to the 
housing stock to enable a life in dignity. 
 
➢ Establish a Public Housing Regulatory Framework. Volt aims to introduce a 
strategic public housing regulatory framework (PHRF). The PHRF must specify a 
set of principles and conditions to guide the role of public authorities in 
 
77 There are precedents concerning individuals affected by autism: Autism Housing Network, Who 
Moves? Part I: The Differences Between Shared Living and Adult Foster Care, available at 
http://www.autismhousingnetwork.org/moves-part-differences-shared-living-adult-foster-care/; for 
elderly, see Elder Home Share, available at https://www.elderhomeshare.ie/ 
78 Among the EU Funds that are able to intervene to support national housing policies, there are the 
European Social Funds, the European Fund for Strategic Investments, the European Regional 
Development Fund and the Fund for European Aid for the Most Deprived.  
79 The Wall Street Journal, How Airbnb Affects Home Prices and Rent, 2017, available at: 
https://www.wsj.com/articles/how-airbnb-affects-home-prices-and-rents-1508724361  
80 Investopedia, Top cities where Airbnb is legal or illegal,  available at 
https://www.investopedia.com/articles/investing/083115/top-cities-where-airbnb-legal-or-illegal.asp    
81 For instance, this was done in Amsterdam: Engadget, Amsterdam will limit Airbnb rentals to 30 days 
per year, 2018, available at: https://www.engadget.com/2018/01/10/amsterdam-airbnb-rental-30-day-
limit/?guccounter=1 
82 See the Italian rental law established by Decree 50/2017, 24.4.2017, available 
at:https://www.studiolegalemetta.com/en/italian-airbnb-tax/  . 


  
31 
managing public housing policy, as well as public, private, and non-profit entities 
that manage housing stocks. The goal is to ensure that disadvantaged groups 
are granted fair and efficient access to social housing. Such principles are the 
following: 
○ Observation of the principles of good administration, transparency, 
equity, and efficiency by public, private, or public-private entities at any 
government level; 
○ Assigning the right to access public housing to single beneficiaries. Such a 
right can not be inherited by relatives of the beneficiary. Once the 
claimant loses the requirement to live in public housing accommodation, 
the space ought to be assigned to a new claimant; 
○ Define a share of the housing stock to be accessible only to individuals 
with special needs, such as disabled citizens or families in which a member 
is disabled (e.g. psychological trauma and disturbances, degrees of 
inability); 
○ Enhance administrative control in order to prevent abuse (illegal 
possession 
of 
the 
accommodation, 
illegal 
inheritance 
of 
the 
accommodation by members of the claimant’s family, circumvention of 
the allocation rules, and illicit circulation of the existing living spaces). 
○ Establish criteria that regulate the yearly inflation rate of the rent and 
utilities (e.g., heating, water, etc.) unless relevant and substantial 
improvements to the building are made. Similarly, establish criteria that 
regulate the frequency and amount of rent increases. In any case, 
increased rent and utility prices charged to the lessee are justified when 
the prices are considerably lower than similar apartments (e.g., size, 
condition) in the same area.83 
○ In the event that local institutions don’t possess the capacity to fulfil the 
demands for public housing, higher government levels should be 
endowed with subsidiary competences. 
 
➢ Digitalise housing services, regardless of the public or private nature of the 
entity or provider managing the housing stock. Volt believes that digitalisation 
can provide an opportunity to enhance the accessibility of the allocation system 
to the recipients of housing services and can provide them with real-time 
information over the exact period of queuing, if any. This appears necessary in 
 
83 For this purpose, the Danish housing law is identified as a best practice. Danish legislation allows 
price increases only once a year and regulates the maximum increase to that of the publicly available 
net retail price. For more details, see the Danish Rent Act (Lejeloven) n. 227 of 09 March 2016, available 
at https://www.retsinformation.dk/forms/r0710.aspx?id=173642. Note that the mentioned cap is only 
applicable for contracts newer than 1 July 2015. Furthermore these regulations apply generally, not 
only to social housing. In particular, the prices and the yearly increases are determined by Statistic 
Denmark, which calculate them and make them publicly available. See Statistic Denmark - DST, Net 
Price Index, available at https://www.dst.dk/en/Statistik/emner/priser-og-
forbrug/forbrugerpriser/nettoprisindeks   


  
32 
order to face the further urbanisation of European cities and the consequent 
difficulties in accessing affordable accommodation.84 
○ Volt intends to promote the adoption, by municipalities, of a digital 
platform system which grants the users (recipients of the housing 
policies) the possibility to choose among cheaper or rather more 
expensive solutions for public housing.85 The system is based on 
accumulated points in accordance with the waiting days. 
○ In order to improve mobility, Volt encourages the adoption of a system 
that does not limit the choice to a single municipality. 
 
C. Homelessness 
 
Homelessness levels have been on the rise across Europe in recent years.86 The EU’s 
2020 Poverty Target87 and Social Investment Funds were supposed to tackle poverty 
and homelessness. However, European governments, with the exception of Finland, 
have fallen behind in addressing the issue.88 
 
Volt will work tirelessly to ensure that no one is left behind and to help those who are 
deemed the most vulnerable. Adequate social policies must be put in place to tackle 
homelessness and rough-sleeping in Europe. In an economically developed continent, 
there is no justification for people to live on the street; therefore, every member of 
society must be given a chance to recover from hardship. Such a strategy is not only 
compassionate and fair; it is also a path to greater economic prosperity and social 
inclusion, through providing the means for homeless people to become active 
members of their communities. Homelessness needs to be tackled holistically; 
therefore, the following is not an exhaustive list, and other policies detailed 
throughout the document will all contribute towards its eradication, including, but not 
limited to: social benefits; accessible and appropriate health care; a decrease in 
unemployment; and reduced in-work poverty. 
 
 
84Morphocode, Global Trends of Urbanisation, available at  https://morphocode.com/global-trends-
urbanisation/; United Nations, World Urbanization Prospect, available at 
https://population.un.org/wpp/Publications/Files/WPP2019_Highlights.pdf  
85 See the Swedish system: OBO - Hem för dig, available at www.obo.se. According to this system, 
points can be withdrawn after a user signs a contract and there are different solutions for students, 
under 25, over 65 and disabled applicants.  
86 Euronews, Homelessness on the Rise in all EU Countries - except Finland: Report, available at 
http://www.euronews.com/2018/03/21/homelessness-on-the-rise-in-all-eu-countries-except-finland-
report  
87 Eurostat - European 2020 indicators - poverty and social exclusion, available at 
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-
explained/index.php?title=EU_statistics_on_income_and_living_conditions_(EU-SILC)_methodology_-
_Europe_2020_target_on_poverty_and_social_exclusion 
88 FEANTSA, News: Housing First in Brno Meets Goal and is Set for Expansion, available at 
http://www.feantsa.org/en/news/2018/04/11/news-housing-first-in-brno-meets-goal-and-is-set-for-
expansion  


  
33 
➢ Invest in sustainable and affordable public housing to bring down the cost of 
rent and allocate high-quality housing for those in need.89 Work with local 
governments to set targets for investment in social housing. Volt will push for a 
“housing first” approach to ending homelessness, providing homeless people 
with social housing before other rehabilitation steps.90 
 
➢ Provide support for community-based social enterprise and rehabilitation 
initiatives. To do so, work with civil society organisations to expand initiatives 
focusing on preventing homelessness as well as providing solutions to help 
those who are already on the street. Such initiatives can focus on a variety of 
projects, such as providing homeless people with a place to live and work, as well 
as lifelong learning through vocational and entrepreneurial programs, 
particularly in the context of cooperative businesses in which they can 
participate and co-own.91 
 
➢ Combat indebtedness in vulnerable households, which can be a cause of 
homelessness among vulnerable groups.92 
○ Invest in awareness campaigns against exploitative practises. 
○ Invest in community-based access to finance, particularly micro-finance 
schemes for entrepreneurship, through community cooperatives in areas 
at risk. 
 
➢ Provide a mixture of services to meet needs related to age, gender, and 
special needs. Addressing the needs of specific groups of vulnerable individuals 
is fundamental to ensure that they feel comfortable and safe and to implement 
measures to prevent the prolonging of their “homelessness journeys.” 
○ Provide treatment for drug use (often a cause and/or result of 
homelessness) and treat addiction as a medical condition rather than a 
crime.93 
 
89 An example of this is HomeLab. See Housing Europe, HomeLab, available at 
https://www.housingeurope.eu/resource-941/homelab 
90 A best practice for this is Finland. See Housing First, Finland, available at   
 http://housingfirsteurope.eu/countries/finland/; FEANTSA, News: Housing First in Brno Meets Goal 
and is Set for Expansion, available at http://www.feantsa.org/en/news/2018/04/11/news-housing-first-
in-brno-meets-goal-and-is-set-for-expansion  
91 Best practices for this are Nightstop and Emmaus. See Night Stop, UK initiative on homelessness, 
Home, available at www.nightstop.org.uk/; See Emmaus, international charity, What we do, available at 
www.emmaus.org.uk/international  
92 Housing policy and vulnerable social groups, Council of Europe, available at  
https://www.coe.int/t/dg3/socialpolicies/socialrights/source/Publication_Housing%20policy%20vulner
able%20groups.pdf; FEANTSA, News: Housing First in Brno Meets Goal and is Set for Expansion, 
available at http://www.feantsa.org/en/news/2018/04/11/news-housing-first-in-brno-meets-goal-and-
is-set-for-expansion  
93 A best practice in this regard is found in Portugal. See Open Society Foundation, Drug Policy in 
Portugal, available at https://www.opensocietyfoundations.org/sites/default/files/drug-policy-in-
portugal-english-20120814.pdf   


  
34 
○ Provide mental health support and social services to those who have 
experienced homelessness or social exclusion in order to tackle 
conditions that may lead to further alienation and worsening of the 
situation. 
○ Increase the provision of preventative services, such as family mediation 
and short-term respite accommodation, so that in cases where 
homelessness can be prevented, families are supported to work through 
conflict. 
○ Tackle gender-based violence and related gendered causes of women’s 
homelessness, including indebtedness and a lack of access to public 
services, and address underlying gendered aspects of poverty and 
homelessness. 
 
➢ Support existing European and national strategies to end homelessness and 
alleviate poverty. Volt will push for an EU strategy to end homelessness, as well 
as national strategies in every member state, and reinforce anti-poverty 
strategies. When the European Commission reviews national policies, known as 
the European semester,94 it must provide a social focus aimed at ending poverty, 
homelessness, and exclusion. 
 
➢ Shorten the time period until the final asylum decision is taken, allowing 
asylum seekers to work from day one, and support and provide access to 
vocational training.95 Work with civil society to match people in need with 
housing and public services, as seen in Utrecht’s Urban Innovative Action.96 
 
➢ Encourage businesses to take on long-term unemployed and/or homeless 
people by providing tax breaks and offering government subsidies. 
 
 
D. Youth 
 
➢ Allow all students free internet access, as it can help reduce poverty by 
providing opportunities for growth. Access and connectivity to technology and 
the internet is not only a matter of economic potential or consumer protection, 
but a social, cultural, and economic right.97 This is why Volt wants to ensure that 
 
Global Commission on Drug Policy, The world drug perception problem, available at 
http://www.globalcommissionondrugs.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/GCDP-Report-
2017_Perceptions-ENGLISH.pdf.org 
94 European Commission, The European Semester, available at https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-
economy-euro/economic-and-fiscal-policy-coordination/eu-economic-governance-monitoring-
prevention-correction/european-semester_en  
95 For more details see “Global Balance, “Asylum seekers and refugees” 
96 Urban Innovative Actions, Utrecht, available at http://www.uia-initiative.eu/en/city/utrecht  
97 For more details see “Smart State”, “Guarantee Digital Right and Freedom“ 


  
35 
there are high-quality internet connections across Europe98 in terms of the 
fastest available mobile network connections and wifi, including in rural areas 
and marginalised communities, as soon as possible. The economic benefits of 
widespread connectivity should be encouraged, while provisions must be 
equitable, fair, and universal as a merit or public good. 
 
➢ Provide youth and students free access to participation and enjoyment of 
culture by showing their national ID or any other official document that 
indicates their age and/or confirms student status.99 This includes free entry to 
museums, monuments, concerts, art exhibitions, music lessons, municipal 
theatres, and cinemas. 
 
➢ Reform the European Youth Card to offer reduced prices for public and 
private transportation (intercity and urban) all over the European Union in 
order to promote travel as a positive initiative that develops a pan-European 
identity. This card should be available for free to all young people (0-30 years 
old) who can prove that they face poverty in Europe. Make public transportation 
free for youth in vocational training and general education who are job-seeking. 
 
➢ Provide young people with free access to the healthcare system.100 Universal 
access to high-quality and affordable healthcare is a basic right for everyone in 
Europe. Volt will set European standards for fast access to specialised healthcare 
and standardise preventive health care programmes for children. 
  
➢ Εqualise the minimum wage for all workers above the age of 18 in order to 
stop the age gap in salaries. This is to discontinue the practise in some European 
countries in which young people (18–25 years old) are legally paid less than those 
over 25 years old.101 
 
➢ Ensure minimum child benefits all over Europe and harmonise them to 
minimum standards in the EU. Universal child benefits substantially reduce child 
poverty. Efficient family policies, such as providing adequate child benefits, lead 
 
98 European Commission, Connectivity for a European Gigabit Society, available at https://digital-
strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/connectivity-european-gigabit-society-brochure 
99 Everyone has the right to participate freely  in the cultural life of the community, to enjoy the arts, 
and to share in scientific advancement and its benefits. This includes the right of individuals and 
communities to know, understand, visit, make use of, maintain, exchange, and develop cultural 
heritage and cultural expressions, as well as to benefit from the cultural heritage and cultural 
expressions of others. It also includes the right to participate in the identification, interpretation, and 
development of cultural heritage, as well as in the design and implementation of safeguarding policies 
and programme. See UNESCO, The right to culture, available at   
https://en.unesco.org/human-
rights/cultural-life 
100 For more details see “Smart State”, “Make high quality healthcare available for everyone”, “Provide 
preventive healthcare programmes for minors” 
101 A wage gap still exists in some European countries, including Greece, The Netherlands, the UK, 
Kosovo, Andora, and Belgium. See FeDEE, Minimum Wage Rates, available at 
https://www.fedee.com/pay-job-evaluation/minimum-wage-rates/ 


  
36 
to better chances to secure a sustainable work-life balance and to protect 
children from social exclusion.102 
 
1. Education 
 
➢ Provide free and daily school meals to all students to break the cycle of hunger 
and child poverty. Access to free meals has nutritional and health benefits103 and 
supports productivity and educational success. 
 
➢ Improve the quality and accessibility of childcare services and promote early 
learning programmes for children to ensure early education services and 
enhance children’s learning skills.104 These should be available to all children 
under 6 years of age for free. 
 
➢ Encourage skill-training (eg., woodworking, culinary, sewing, foreign 
languages, rhetoric, business management) while at school, aiming to develop 
skills that enhance human capital and lead to long-term gains in employment and 
standard of living.105 
 
➢ Ensure that students have access to career guidance. Such guidance will 
include opportunities available for students, including higher education and 
career options. Counselling will also provide an opportunity to learn about the 
job market. 
 
➢ Perform temporary positive discrimination to speed up economic, social, and 
cultural integration (i.e., special practises aimed at fostering equality: 
“supporting groups of people who face, or have faced, entrenched 
discrimination so they can have similar access to opportunities as others in the 
community.”)106 Include special tracks and exams that reward merit among 
students from disadvantaged backgrounds to increase their access to good 
schools and universities. 
 
 
102 For more details, see “Economic Renaissance”, “Shape the future of work and tackle (youth) 
unemployment with innovative concepts” 
103 For more information, see Sustain, Free school meals for all, available at 
https://www.sustainweb.org/childrensfoodcampaign/free_school_meals/ 
104 Early learning is a term that is used to describe programmes that provide education for children 
outside their own home before kindergarten. See Early Learning Coalition for Osceola County, What is 
Early Learning?, available at 
http://elcosceola.org/for-families/what-is-early-learning/ 
105 What Works in Youth Employment, Skills Training programmes, available at  
https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_emp/---
emp_policy/documents/publication/wcms_318139.pdf 
                                                                
106 Positive Actions to achieve equality, Human Rights Commission, available at 
https://www.hrc.co.nz/enquiries-and-complaints/faqs/positive-actions-achieve-equality/  


  
37 
➢ Ensure the necessary funding goes through all levels of education (including 
tertiary and vocational education), including through low or no-interest loans for 
students and/or their families, subsidised by governments. 
 
➢ Reduce the stigma attached to homelessness through educational policies 
and by running awareness-raising campaigns, particularly targeted at youth. 
 
 
 


  
38 
IV. Include everyone in society 
 
A. Seniors 
 
1. Intergenerational engagement 
 
➢ Introduce intergenerational/multigenerational houses to revive the idea of 
interaction and mutual support between young and old. The subsidy programme 
for multigenerational living, run by the German Federal Ministry for Family 
Affairs, Senior Citizens, and Youth (BMFSFJ), is a model that other countries 
should investigate. It is implemented with EU, federal, and local funding in the 
form of a co-financing mode.107 
 
➢ Introduce state-sponsored mentoring programmes that connect retirees 
with young people. Such intergenerational programmes are beneficial for both 
parties108. Young people gain attention and the mentoring they often lack. 
Therefore, it could be part of the solution to tackle expensive childcare systems. 
Seniors benefit from learning new skills (e.g. technology), having company, and 
a sense of purpose, which further tackles the loneliness of seniors.109 
 
2. Infrastructures 
 
➢ Ensure the capillarity of services for seniors, including in remote locations and 
rural areas. This could, for example, help elderly people who wish to remain in 
their homes, but live outside areas of high service density. 
 
➢ Support programmes and centres for the elderly by providing seniors with 
geriatric healthcare services and supporting them in activities such as trips, 
lifelong learning, and other programmes as such. Ensure that seniors have access 
to goods and services, including the web. Volt will work to increase the focus on 
digital technological literacy education for all ages. 
 
➢ Ensure transport is accessible and affordable for seniors. 
○ Ensure that seniors can travel at a reduced cost on local public 
transportation. 
 
107  European Commission: Electronic Platform for Adult Learning in Europe, The multigenerational 
house model, available at https://ec.europa.eu/epale/en/blog/intergenerational-learning-
multigenerational-house-model;    
 
108 Stanford, Older people offer resources that children need, Stanford report says, available at 
https://news.stanford.edu/2016/09/08/older-people-offer-resource-children-need-stanford-report-
says/   
109 Mmlearn, Improving Quality of Life for Seniors through Intergenerational Mentoring, available at  
http://training.mmlearn.org/blog/improving-quality-of-life-for-seniors-through-intergenerational-
mentoring  


  
39 
○ Provide discounts and concessions on train tickets. This would also apply 
to privately-owned train companies. 
○ Adapt public transportation so that seniors who are less mobile can freely 
use it. This includes requiring public transportation (e.g. buses, trams) to 
have wheelchair lifts and requiring every train to have at least one 
wheelchair-accessible railcar. 
 
3. Work 
 
➢ Provide incentives for individuals to continue to be engaged at work, in 
accordance with their ability and skills. 
 
➢ Fight discrimination based on age in everyday life, in the workplace, and in 
seeking employment.110 
 
➢ Encourage lifelong learning to enable people to adapt to changes in the 
labour market and in society.111 Volt supports a strategy to move “From an 
Unemployment to an Employment Insurance”, with a reorientation towards a 
preventive scheme focused on maintaining employability,112 including for the 
elderly. 
 
 
B. People with Special Educational Needs and Disability 
(SEND) 
 
People with SEND shall be treated with decency and shall always have access to (basic) 
services. They should have access to equal opportunities in society. People with SEND 
are people first, with their own lives, ambitions, and hopes. 
 
 
 
110The European Union has since 2000 a directive banning – among others – discrimination on the basis 
of age in employment and occupation. See https://ec.europa.eu/info/policies/justice-and-fundamental-
rights/combatting-discrimination/age-discrimination_en 
111 Promoting lifelong learning for older workers, available at 
https://www.cedefop.europa.eu/files/3045_en.pdf 
112 For more details see Economic Renaissance, Shape the future of work and tackle (youth) 
unemployment with innovative concepts  


  
40 
1. Education 
 
Education should aim to promote the academic, practical, social, and emotional 
learning of all learners. Disabled children and children with special educational needs 
are entitled to an education that pushes them to reach their full potential.113 
 
➢ Ensure that educator qualifications include special education needs and 
disability training and, where practical, placement experience in a setting caring 
for children with additional needs.114 
○ Ensure educational institutions approach teaching as a learning activity, 
where teachers take responsibility for their lifelong learning.115 
○ Promote learner differences as an asset to education.116 
○ Promote 
anti-bullying 
campaigns 
to 
promote 
inclusion 
and 
understanding.117 
 
➢ Create and enforce an inclusion requirement for educational facilities, which 
will consist of producing information on admissions policies and making 
reasonable adjustments to admit children with additional needs. This 
requirement should be supported by clear arrangements with local authorities 
to provide the necessary support. 
 
➢ Ensure that families of children with SEND have access to affordable, 
suitable, and high-quality childcare.118 In order to do this: 
○ Identify where financial support must be improved to meet the extra 
costs of childcare for disabled children and remove barriers to access. 
○ Introduce a requirement for local authorities to publish clear information 
on access to childcare, including support for parents and providers. 
 
113 Council for disabled children, Education & Learning, available at 
https://councilfordisabledchildren.org.uk/our-work/education-learning  
114 European Agency for Special Needs and Inclusive Education, Five Key Messages for Inclusive 
Education: Putting theory into practice, available at  https://www.european-
agency.org/sites/default/files/Five%20Key%20Messages%20for%20Inclusive%20Education.pdf  
115 See previous footnote.  
116 See previous footnote.  
117  An example of this is the “All Together School” initiative, which has proven to reduce bullying of all 
children. The All Together programme builds upon the work of the Anti-Bullying Alliance’s previous 
SEND anti-bullying champion programme which saw significant positive results. Participating schools 
are supported on- and offline to make whole-school changes to anti-bullying practices. See Anti-
bullying Alliance, The All Together Anti-Bullying programme for Schools, available at  http://www.anti-
bullyingalliance.org.uk/aba-our-work/our-programmes/all-together-anti-bullying-programme-schools   
118 In 2014, Every Disabled Child Matters launched a new campaign called Levelling the Playing Field 
following an independent parliamentary inquiry into childcare for disabled children and those with 
Special Educational Needs. See Council for Disabled Children, Levelling the Playing Field: One Year 
Update, available at  https://councilfordisabledchildren.org.uk/resources/all-
resources/filter/campaigning/levelling-playing-field-one-year-update  


  
41 
○ Ensure inclusivity is supported in mainstream schools so that children with 
SEND can be part of one inclusive system. This excludes cases where 
children would benefit more from specialised institutions. 
 
➢ Ensure data (including statistical and research data) is collected in a holistic 
manner to enable states to formulate appropriate policies, while complying with 
legal safeguards and international norms to protect human rights in the 
collection and use of statistics. 
 
2. Health and Wellbeing 
 
➢ Destigmatise mental health by: 
○ Easing access to mental health care. 
○ Openly discussing mental illness in education and at work. 
○ Incentivising schools and companies to provide mental health support. 
 
➢ Ensure that people with SEND, their next of kin and carers explore and 
understand their rights and how to navigate the healthcare system.119 This 
could include face-to-face training, online modules, and online resources. 
Provide criteria for quality (a set of non-mandatory standards for delivering 
health services) so that healthcare providers can assess how their provisions 
meet the needs and preferences of people with SEND.120 
 
➢ Draft 
and 
enforce 
minimum 
standards 
for 
psychiatric 
hospitals, 
rehabilitation centres, and other hospitals with longer-term patients, which 
should include but not be limited to: 
○ Providing support to people with SEND.121 
○ Systematically involving people with SEND in planning and managing their 
own healthcare, when possible. 
○ Ensuring health professionals have training on how to communicate with 
people with learning difficulties and communication impairments.122 
 
 
119 The Get Your Rights  project helps children and young people explore their rights and become more 
confident when using the NHS, by explaining what the rights in the NHS Constitution mean for them 
through a website, workshop resources, and research papers. See Get Your Rights, Everything you need 
to get the most out of the NHS, available at http://www.getyourrights.org/  
120 Based on ‘You’re Welcome - Quality Criteria for Young People Friendly Health Service’ policy paper. 
See Gov.uk, Quality criteria for young people friendly health services, available at  
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/quality-criteria-for-young-people-friendly-health-
services 
121 The Special Educational Consortium (SEC) campaigned for young people in custody to receive 
support while they are detained. See Council for Disabled Children, Our work, available at 
https://councilfordisabledchildren.org.uk/special-educational-consortium/our-work.   
122 A best practice in this regard is the “Managing My Way” project. See  Council for Disabled Children, 
Managing my Way,  available at https://councilfordisabledchildren.org.uk/what-we-do-
0/practice/adulthood/adulthood-policy 
 


  
42 
3. Into Adulthood 
 
➢ Ensure services facilitate the successful transition of young people with 
complex health needs from childhood to adulthood.123 Transitional care 
should be commissioned collaboratively by child and adult services.124 
 
➢ Support mid-sized to large companies to make work experience schemes 
fully inclusive, so that people with special education needs and disabilities have 
opportunities to join the workforce and are supported to take up these 
opportunities. 
 
4. Participation 
 
➢ Ensure the accessibility of public transportation everywhere and support 
barrier-free transport (e.g., barrier-free underground and metro services, 
regular transportation in rural areas, etc). People with SEND should be involved 
in planning decisions about local and accessible public transport, so that 
transport issues do not become a barrier to people’s participation. 
 
➢ Set minimum quotas across the private and public sector (mid-sized to large 
companies) to ensure that people with SEND are given the chance to work. If 
quotas are not met, companies should provide and contribute to vocational 
programmes to integrate people with disabilities. Give benefits to companies 
that employ people with disabilities and tax breaks to companies focusing on 
technological innovation for those in need. 
 
➢ Promote the supported employment model, which is an individualised model 
to ensure people with SEND secure and retain employment. Using a 
collaborative strategy, the model allows people with SEND to sustain 
employment and businesses to employ valuable workers.125 
 
➢ Ensure that people with SEND are included in political decision-making 
processes. Provide clear guidance on how to involve people with SEND in 
 
123 Transition is the "purposeful, planned process that addresses the medical, psychosocial, educational 
and vocational needs of adolescents and young adults with chronic medical and physical conditions as 
they move from child-centred to adult oriented healthcare systems." See Blum RW, Garell D, Hodgman 
CH, et al. Transition from child-centred to adult health-care systems for adolescents with chronic 
conditions. A position paper of the Society for Adolescent Medicine. 14:570–6, available at 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/1054139X9390143D   
124 Following the  example of Transition Information Network submitted to UK’s Department of 
Health. See  Transition Information Network, Implications for the Department of Health, available at 
https://research.ncl.ac.uk/media/sites/researchwebsites/transitionprogramme/Implications%20for%20
Department%20of%20Health.docx         
125  European Union of Supported Employment, European Union of Supported Employment Toolkit, 
available at http://www.euse.org/content/supported-employment-toolkit/EUSE-Toolkit-2010.pdf  


  
43 
strategic decision making, which should include indicators to measure the 
performance of the development of inclusive participation opportunities.126 
 
5. Social Care 
 
➢ Establish a new statutory right to a period of ‘adjustment leave’ to enable 
parents to cope with the onset of a disability in a child and put care 
arrangements 
in 
place. 
 
Provide support to families from the time of diagnosis that their child has a 
learning disability.127 This could include a key worker to support the family, and 
it is particularly important if the parent or carer has SEND needs themselves. 
 
6. Holistic approach 
 
➢ Provide guidance and funding to ensure provisions such as leisure centres, 
after-school clubs, and holiday play schemes can accommodate people with 
special educational needs and disabilities. This includes training staff, ensuring 
buildings are accessible, and ensuring activities are differentiated. 
 
➢ Ensure coordination and cooperation among services (such as social care 
services, education, hospitals, transportation, etc.) to ensure a holistic approach 
and good communication between the key stakeholders. 
 
 
C. Child in care 
 
Every child deserves a home and an opportunity to live a happy life. Institutions, or 
orphanages, across Europe are proving to be insufficient to accommodate and address 
the needs of children who have been placed under the care of the state.128 
Deinstitutionalisation is the process of replacing institutional care for children with 
care in a family or family-like environment. The main focus should therefore be placed 
on supporting adoption policies and reforming the current institutional system. 
Poverty and social exclusion among families is a driving force of children's 
 
126 This is based off the VIPER recommendations. VIPER is a three-year project which started in summer 
2010, and set out to explore disabled children and young people’s participation in decision making 
about services. See Council for disabled children, VIPER, available at 
https://councilfordisabledchildren.org.uk/our-work/participation/policy/research-young-peoples-
participation-local-decisions-viper  
127 The Foundation for People With Learning Disabilities’ First Impressions research project (Davies, J., 
(2005) First Impressions London: The Foundation for People with Learning Disabilities) emphasised the 
shortcomings in how professionals share the new’s child’s disability. Nearly 50% of participants in the 
study reported a poor experience. If there is good information and emotional and practical support, 
this will impact positively on the future of people with learning disabilities and their families. 
128 Opening Doors for Europe’s Children, Institutional Care in Europe, available at  
http://www.openingdoors.eu/institutional-care-in-europe/  


  
44 
institutionalisation - many children placed in orphanages have parents - therefore our 
children's care policy goes hand in hand with our policy on the alleviation of poverty. 
 
➢ Give the opportunity to adopt a child to every adult—regardless of their 
gender identity, sexual orientation, or marital status—based on the same criteria 
as those imposed on heterosexual couples, according to local law. 
 
➢ Enable children to have more than two legal parents if it is in the best interest 
of the child.129 Typical examples of this include a child raised by both their 
biological parents and by a third person who equally cares for the child, who 
could be a step-parent or a person who is also considered by the child to be a 
parent. 
 
➢ Reform existing institutional care systems to improve the quality of care, 
including re-training and training staff, supporting independent living skills and 
personalised transition plans, and strengthening existing services.130 Increase 
public spending to strengthen such institutions and ensure they are of the 
highest quality. 
 
➢ Transition from institutional care to family and community care 
(deinstitutionalisation), with a focus on the integration of children into 
communities and wider society to avoid segregation and social exclusion.131 
 
 
V. Ending Human Trafficking 
 
Ensure the implementation of a European strategy to end human trafficking that includes: 
 
129 A  best practice example is California. See SB-274 Family law: parentage: child custody and support, 
available at https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/billNavClient.xhtml?bill_id=201320140SB274. To 
understand better the issues linked to this subject, see Youtube, Should three-parent families be 
legally recognised? See The Economist, available at  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IlBtgXO3taw;  
Boston.com, Courts and ‘tri-parenting’: A state-by-state look, available at  
https://www.boston.com/news/national-news/2017/06/18/courts-and-tri-parenting-a-state-by-state-
look  
130 Opening Doors for Europe’s Children, Poverty remains a Europe-wide cause of children’s 
institutionalisation, campaign’s latest fact sheets reveal, available at 
http://www.openingdoors.eu/opening-doors-for-europes-children-releases-latest-fact-sheets-from-15-
countries/  
131 Receiving community-based services provides an opportunity to have adequate individual support 
that institutional care often cannot provide, and as a consequence, a good quality of life and the right 
to independent living. See European Commision, Employment, Social Affairs and Inclusion, available at 
http://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=1246&furtherNews=yes&langId=en&newsId=9056  


  
45 
➢ A human-rights-based approach that places the victim at the centre of any action 
related to the prevention and response to human trafficking.132 
➢ The local dimension: To ensure that the human rights and dignity of the trafficked 
persons are protected, local authorities should undergo special training on how to 
recognise, help, and protect victims. 
➢ A gender and child-sensitive approach. 
➢ Cybersecurity: The internet has provided grounds for new forms of exploitation, which 
must be acknowledged and assessed. 
➢ International cooperation: Ensure that the multidirectional information flow between 
police forces and agencies such as Europol and Interpol Cooperation is extended to 
include local institutions, civil society organisations, and NGOs, as they are the actors 
closest to the victims and potential victims.  
  
 
 
132 UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), Recommended Principles and 
Guidelines on Human Rights and Human Trafficking, available at: 
https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Publications/Traffickingen.pdf  


  
46 
 
VI. Own your body 
 
A. Sex Work 
 
Legalize sex work, while heavily regulating the profession. 
 
➢ Legalise sex work, and ensure that safe working places exist; such as 
brothels.133 
 
➢ Ensure that sex workers get insurance, healthcare, and other standard 
protections.134  
 
➢ Address violence and trafficking, and ensure access to legal services. 
 
 
B. Ending life with dignity 
 
Ending life is a profound existential process that cannot be reduced to a mere medical 
procedure. 
 
Volt believes that every person has the right to determine how to end their life with 
dignity, as long as no other person’s life is harmed. A wide range of support should be 
available and accessible for those people seeking help, in addition to medical attention, 
e.g., palliative medicine to alleviate pain, hospices to offer psychological or spiritual 
support, or flexible work-time to allow family members to care for dying relatives. In 
extreme cases of "constant and unbearable physical or mental suffering that cannot be 
alleviated,"135 a person may seek assistance to end their life and deserves to be 
supported in doing so with dignity. 
 
We distinguish three forms of terminating life upon request: 
- 
Passive Euthanasia: Passive euthanasia occurs when the person dies because the 
medical professionals either don't do the necessary to keep the person alive, or 
they stop doing something that is keeping the person alive, such as switching off 
 
133 Holland's legal prostitution zones reduce rape: 
https://journalistsresource.org/studies/government/criminal-justice/legal-prostitution-reduce-rape-
holland/ 
134 The UN provides warning and best practices to ensure a better healthcare system for prostitutes: 
https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/Documents/Issues/Health/sexual-reproductive-health-
covid/CSOs/ngo.nswp.pdf  
135 The Belgian Act on Euthanasia of May, 28th 2002, available at https://apmonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2019/01/belgium-act-on-euthanasia.pdf  


  
47 
life-support machines, disconnecting a feeding tube, not carrying out a life-
extending operation, or not giving life-extending drugs.136 
- 
Assisted Suicide: A person makes the request out of their free will, without coercion 
or pressure by other people, and with full conviction to take their life, and seeks 
professional (typically a doctor’s) assistance. Before undertaking assisted 
suicide, the person should first be given the opportunity to explore other life 
and death options available. At the very end, the person stays in full control of 
the process and is solely responsible for their death. The physician's role is to 
supply, but not to administer, the lethal drug. 
- 
Active Euthanasia: Active euthanasia occurs when a doctor, or another person, 
intentionally administers a fatal dose of a medication to cause the patient's death 
at the patient's request and with full, informed consent.137 The main difference 
between assisted suicide and active euthanasia is that active euthanasia is 
entirely physician-mediated, including the administration of the lethal dose, 
whereas people committing assisted suicide administer the lethal dose to 
themselves. 
 
Volt stands for the following policies: 
 
➢ Legalise 
passive 
euthanasia. 
 
Also legalise living wills to guide decisions on passive euthanasia for people who 
wish passive euthanasia to be performed for people who find themselves in a 
particular situation which they regard as unbearable and offering no prospect of 
improvement (e.g., dementia), and in which the person is incapacitated to make 
a decision for themselves.138 
 
➢ Legalise assisted suicide for competent adults who suffer from "constant and 
unbearable physical or mental suffering that cannot be alleviated". Ensure that 
the following criteria are met before allowing assisted suicide: 
○ The person is a competent adult who suffers from "constant and 
unbearable physical or mental suffering that cannot be alleviated." 
○ The person undergoes an ex-ante evaluation with at least two 
independent doctors and one psychiatrist. They need to confirm that the 
person is a competent adult who suffers from "constant and unbearable 
physical or mental suffering that cannot be alleviated," and that the 
 
136 BBC, Ethics Guide, Active and Passive Euthanasia, available at 
http://www.bbc.co.uk/ethics/euthanasia/overview/activepassive_1.shtml  
137 Michael Manning, Euthanasia and Physician-Assisted Suicide: Killing or Caring?, 1998, p.3, available 
at 
https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=t1THVkQPbfsC&printsec=copyright&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q&
f=false   
138  In fact, a living will need not block treatment, but could also specify that doctors must continue 
treatment until the patient is dead, regardless of pain or suffering. See BBC, Ethics Guide, Living wills, 
available at http://www.bbc.co.uk/ethics/euthanasia/overview/livingwills.shtml  


  
48 
person is making the request out of their own free will, not coerced or 
pressured by other people. 
○ The person’s request must be made earnestly and with full conviction, as 
determined during the ex-ante evaluation. 
○ If the person is a minor, we only allow assisted suicide in exceptional 
circumstances, with the consent of parents if they are younger than 16 
years old, and with the parents at least informed if they are under 18, and 
a confirmation by at least two independent doctors and one psychiatrist 
that the minor is competent to make such a decision. 
➢ Ensure that during the procedure; 
○ The person stays in full control of the process. Indeed, the physician’s role 
is to supply, but not to administer, the lethal drug. 
○ If the patient chooses so, family and friends are allowed to be present. 
➢ Put in place an ex-post committee to review all cases of assisted suicide, 
comprised of at least a medical expert, an ethicist, and a legal expert. Every 
instance of assisted suicide must be reported. 
➢ Make publicly available the names of doctors willing to assist. Ensure that no 
doctor is forced to take part in such a procedure. 
 
➢ Strictly oppose active euthanasia, with one exception: 
○ Allow active euthanasia only when a person fulfils all the conditions for 
assisted suicide (see provisions above) but is physically handicapped in 
such a way that makes it impossible for the person to administer the legal 
dose themself. Ensure that the doctor’s intervention is as limited as 
possible. 
○ Volt opposes the legalisation of active euthanasia, as it is a highly 
controversial issue that raises ethical and legal issues, in particular the 
fact that another party performs the act of taking the life of a person. 
 
 
C. Reproductive rights 
 
The right to health includes women’s sexual and reproductive rights, which states have 
an obligation to respect, protect, and guarantee. Women are entitled to reproductive 
health care services, goods, and facilities that are (a) available in adequate amounts; (b) 
accessible physically and economically; (c) accessible without discrimination; and (d) of 
good quality.139 
 
Access to health services is a human right. However, women are often either denied 
this right or have limited access to it, especially when it comes to abortion or 
contraception. 
 
 
 
139 According to the Special Rapporteur on the right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest 
attainable standard of physical and mental health. See this UN report, available at 
https://www.ohchr.org/en/special-procedures/sr-health  


  
49 
1. Abortion 
 
➢ Make abortion accessible in law and practice, and free for all women, at least 
until the end of the first trimester.140 
○ Ensure that abortions are not only legal, but also accessible. This means 
that health centres and hospitals should offer the procedures across 
regions, and that there should be no unreasonably long waiting lists. 
○ Ensure that women have knowledge of, and access to, all possible types 
of abortion. 
 
➢ Make abortions accessible at a later stage as well, when a continued 
pregnancy would endanger the health of the mother or when the fetus is not 
viable. 
 
➢ Remove undue burdens on women, such as “cooling off periods”, parental 
consent, spousal or partner consent, multiple appointments necessitating 
multiple days off, etc. 
○ For women under the age of 16, no parental consent is necessary, but an 
adult needs to be present.141 
○ Abortions need to be provided by enough doctors, hospitals, clinics, and 
others to make it not only legal but easily accessible. 
 
2. Contraception 
 
➢ Ensure that women have access to the morning after pill without a 
prescription from a doctor, that pharmacies are required to sell them, and that 
it is reimbursed by public healthcare. 
 
➢ Ensure that women have access to doctors to be prescribed contraceptive 
methods.  Require pharmacies to sell the various contraceptive methods and for 
those to be reimbursed by public healthcare. 
 
 
140  For example, in  Poland, abortion is only lawful to safeguard the life or health of a woman, in 
situations of severe fetal anomaly, or where the pregnancy results from rape or another criminal act 
such as incest; and even in those situations in which abortion is legal, multiple barriers combine to limit 
women’s access in practice. See Human Rights Watch, Polish Parliament Must Protect Women’s Health 
and Rights, available at https://www.hrw.org/news/2018/03/22/polish-parliament-must-protect-
womens-health-and-rights. Additionally, abortions need to be accessible in practice, because despite 
the fact that abortion is legal in certain countries, it is not always accessible. Denmark, Finland, 
Germany, Italy, Portugal, and Spain are some of the countries with tight regulations regarding abortion, 
including extended waiting periods, counseling sessions and high prices. See abortion-clinics.eu, 
Countries with restricted access, available at http://abortion-clinics.eu/abortion-europe/restrictive-
access-foreign-women/  
141A  best practice in this regard is France. See IVG.gouv.fr, L’IVG pour mineures : comment ça se passe?, 
available at  https://ivg.gouv.fr/l-ivg-pour-mineures-comment-ca-se-passe.html  


  
50 
➢ Reform the healthcare system so that all contraception is reimbursed by 
providers of healthcare and services upon request, without any need to report 
patient age.  
 
3. Education 
 
➢ Introduce accurate, mandatory classes on sexual reproductive health and 
rights in schools. Volt will advocate for a European educational standard for the 
curricula and ensure that schools comply with it.142 
 
➢ Ensure that hospitals offer free educational information and/or programmes 
on sexual reproductive health and rights and that women are informed about 
their rights, contraception, and protection against sexually transmitted diseases. 
 
 
 
D. Surrogacy143 
 
Surrogacy is a method of assisted reproduction. There are two types of surrogacy 
arrangements: gestational surrogacy, where the embryo is created via in vitro 
fertilisation (IVF) using the eggs and sperm of the intended parents or donors, and 
traditional surrogacy, where the surrogate mother uses her own egg and is artificially 
inseminated using sperm from the intended father or a donor. A surrogacy agreement 
can be altruistic or commercial. Surrogacy is already legal in some European countries, 
including the UK, Denmark, Ireland, Belgium, Greece, and the Netherlands, given that 
the surrogate does not receive any financial benefit.144 
 
➢ Legalise surrogacy agreements when they are altruistic (not counting 
reimbursement of expenses) 
 
➢ Research potential ways to legalise commercial surrogacy agreements while 
ensuring that it does not increase the power of black markets. 
 
 
E. Conversion Therapy 
 
 
142 The Council of Europe emphasised that sex education is one of the most critical issues in 
guaranteeing women's sexual and reproductive health. Nonetheless, even if some countries have 
established sex education in schools the information provided is not medically "accurate, scientific and 
age-appropriate" in a number of states or is focused on a "preparation for family life", according to the 
Council. In addition, in Bulgaria, Lithuania, Poland and Romania, sex education either remains voluntary 
or policies allow children to be withdrawn from classes. See EUobserver, Council of Europe warns on 
backlash to abortion access, available at https://euobserver.com/health/140158  
143 Best practices include South Africa, California, New Hampshire, The Netherlands 
144 See Sensible Surrogacy, Surrogacy Laws Around the World, available at 
https://www.sensiblesurrogacy.com/international-surrogacy/  


  
51 
Conversion therapy refers to any form of treatment or psychotherapy that aims to 
change a person’s sexual orientation or to suppress a person’s gender identity.145 The 
basic assumption behind such therapy is that being lesbian, gay, bisexual, or 
transgender is a disease, mental illness, deficiency, or disability that can be ‘cured’. 
Conversion therapy is a delusory and harmful act that can lead to depression, anxiety, 
drug use, homelessness, and suicide, with minors being the most vulnerable to such 
practice.146 
 
➢ Ban the practise of conversion therapy across Europe and the 
pathologisation of trans identities147. Ensure that no person will be allowed to 
advertise, offer, or force a person to undergo such therapy. Further, no person 
can be forcibly removed from a member state for the purposes of undergoing 
conversion therapy. 
 
➢ Encourage social acceptance and psychological support for anyone 
undergoing gender transition or identity exploration and development, 
including interventions that are sexual orientation-neutral. 
 
145 Stonewall, Conversion Therapy, available at http://www.stonewall.org.uk/campaign-
groups/conversion-therapy  
146 Human Rights Campaign, The Lies and Dangers of Efforts to Change Sexual Orientation of Gender 
Identity, available at https://www.hrc.org/resources/the-lies-and-dangers-of-reparative-therapy  
147 excludes the prohibition of voluntary gender affirming procedures 


