Volt’s Mapping of Policies
Edition 9.0
Challenge 2 - Economic Renaissance
1


Table of contents:
Vision
3
Develop and reform our economies
4
Unleash entrepreneurship and small businesses
4
Funding support and sustainable finance
6
Profits-for-all mentality
7
Service mentality
8
Revive innovation in our economies and promote industries of the future
9
Idea generation and supportive infrastructure
9
Supportive regulation
10
New markets and new energy
10
Foster a European Artificial Intelligence initiative
12
Develop the ethical and legal foundation and boundaries for AI development
13
Develop and adopt AI ethics guidelines
13
Develop a legal and regulatory framework
13
Build Europe’s competence in artificial intelligence (AI) development
15
Prepare Society for artificial intelligence (AI) related structural changes
16
Shape the future of work and tackle (youth) unemployment with innovative concepts
18
Future of work – new working schemes
18
Preventive measures, targeted re-skilling and reintegration
20
Ease job seeking and create fluid job markets
22
Social policies
24
Develop economically disadvantaged areas and champion trade
27
Develop economically disadvantaged areas
27
Champion Trade
29
Fiscal policies
30
Taxation challenges and general principles
30
Concrete proposals about taxation
30
Individual taxation
30
Corporate taxation
31
General taxation
31
European corporate tax
32
European Tax Authority (ETA)
33
Mobilise Europe in a smart and sustainable way
36
2


I.
Vision
The future of a united Europe relies on solving our current economic challenges. This
includes the continuing impacts of the continuing crises since 2008 on European
economies, high unemployment, in particular, youth unemployment; threats and
opportunities arising from digitisation, and the precarious sustainability of Member
States' budgets. Volt Europa´s economic vision requires our societies to reduce
inequalities between EU economies and to address future economic challenges with
sound, data-driven approaches.
Volt will address these challenges by:
➢Unleashing the potential of entrepreneurs and small and medium-sized
enterprises (SMEs) to make them competitive and to show youth the potential
of entrepreneurship.1
➢Reviving innovation in our economies and promoting the industries of the
future.
➢Actively shaping the future of work.
➢Ensuring social protection. Volt stands for a European approach to social
development with practical minimum standards for social protection, decent
work and pay. Volt further seeks to enable a successful digital transformation
that contributes to greater prosperity and better working conditions.
➢Reducing imbalances. Volt envisions a European Union that extends its positive
impact to the entire continent, not just its most productive areas. Along with
strict monitoring of the use of funds, Volt believes it is time for broader,
smarter, and more environmentally sustainable strategies aimed at reducing
socio-economic disparities and creating opportunities for every citizen.
➢Developing economically disadvantaged areas with a new, unified strategy
working with social actors across the EU.
➢Harmonising European corporate taxation to facilitate cross-border trade and
curb aggressive tax planning, thus creating a stronger and fairer single market.
➢Endowing the European Union to levy its own taxes to finance a larger budget
independent of member state contributions: candidate taxes are a European
corporate tax, a European VAT, and European emissions taxes.
➢Mobilising Europe in a smart, safe, and sustainable way.
➢Investing in the climate resilience of all those living in Europe.
1 Europe’s start-up ecosystem as a whole is still held back by several factors, among them talent
(engineers are paid too little, and it takes too long for startups to hire them) and access to funding. See
Dispatches Europe, 2017 Global Startup Ecosystem Report: Europe still struggling to find funding and
talent.
3


We support a new way of shaping European economies based on EU-wide cooperation
to build an integrated, fair and sustainable economic system.
4


II.
Develop and reform our economies
A. Unleash entrepreneurship and small businesses
➢Create a Digital One-Stop-Shop for business start-ups, automating and
simplifying reporting, tax files, and all other government interactions. Volt
wants to cut red tape at EU level to ensure that doing business across borders
is as easy as doing business in your Member State. This lets small- and
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) benefit from the size of the single market and
supports growth.
○
Increase the range of services offered by “Points of Single Contact” for
2
businesses through digital platforms: simplify contact points with public
administration in national governments by creating adequate platforms
that are easy to use and provide solutions for businesses operating
nationally and across borders.
○
Increase the diffusion of a One-Stop-Shop system to facilitate and
control taxation reporting. Push for digitisation and automation of
balance sheets and reporting systems, as well as all other government
interactions.
○
Ensure that digital One-Stop-Shop contains a provision to support SMEs
and entrepreneurs. This will include assistance in meeting government
requirements, contacts with venture capitalists and start-up incubators,
partnerships with private companies that can offer discounted services
to SMEs, etc.
➢Encourage harmonisation of registration fees, times and processes for
starting a business across Europe. In all EU Member States, it must be
possible to found a company for EUR 1 within three working days, with an
additional cost of up to a maximum of EUR 1,000 (for licences etc.). All
registration steps should be feasible online (see Digital One-Stop-Shop above),
in accordance with best practices from, e.g., New Zealand, Australia, Singapore,
Canada, Portugal, Denmark and Estonia. The legal status obtained (Limited
3
Liability Company, or LLC) should ensure an appropriate credit rating,
supporting entrepreneurs in obtaining higher ratings through capital build-up.
As a further step, Volt endorses the development of an EU procedure for
setting up companies based in the EU. Especially for freelancers, there should
3 Such as New Zealand, Australia, Singapore, Canada, Portugal, Denmark and Estonia. See World Bank,
Starting a business - Good Practices, available at
http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/exploretopics/starting-a-business/good-practices
2 European Commission, Point of Single Contact, available at
https://ec.europa.eu/growth/single-market/services/services-directive/in-practice/contact_en
5


be a very simple legal form that can be completed online in a short period of
time (e.g., 1 day). The procedure can be built on the legal model of Societas
Europaea, mixed with components of the Estonian model of e-residency and
company registration.4
➢Facilitate a completely bureaucracy- and paperless start-up of a small
business
(for
micro-enterprises
in
sectors
not
subject
to
licensing):
Entrepreneurs should be able to start a small business by registering it
according to the process mentioned above (cost of EUR 1, within three business
days). A licence should not be necessary if the legal requirements are met,
allowing small businesses such as, e.g., coffee shops or hairdressers’ salons to
open as soon as the owners are ready.
➢Implement
a
network
of
European
incubators
with
advisory
and
intermediary functions. This measure can build on the European Business and
Innovation Centre Network
and the start-up Europe Club.
5
6
○
Incubators provide knowledge sharing for SMEs and start-ups operating
nationally and across Europe (e.g., guides and assistance on regulations
and procedures for starting businesses, taxes and social security
information, and financial and legal advice). In addition, tax-priviledged
or tax-free advisory roles for startups should be created to foster the
exchange of advice between start-ups and experienced professionals
and companies. Businesses can receive incentives based on their level of
participation.
○
Intermediation
should
be facilitated between existing SMEs and
startups. This can be achieved by proposing a network, supervised and
created by the European Commission, to help companies across the EU
communicate with each other.7
➢Create a truly efficient European Open Data Platform. Improve the usability
8
of the data available on the EU Open Data Portal in such areas as mobility,
smart cities, production and tourism to encourage data-driven business and
foster pan-European business models. A single data protection policy and a
single authority for data validation are needed to guarantee that data gathered
is usable in different countries.9
9 European Commission, Data protection, available at
https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/law-topic/data-protection_en
8 For more details see Volt Challenge: Citizen Empowerment - Foster vibrant, pluralistic and accessible
public spheres to enable citizens to take informed political decisions
7 One national example of this is Enterprise Ireland. See Enterprise Ireland, Our services, available at
https://www.enterprise-ireland.com/en/About-Us/Services/
6 European Commission, Startup Europe: EU funds and support, available at
https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/startup-europe
5 EBN, home, available at https://ebn.eu/
4 E-residency, Start a company, available at https://e-resident.gov.ee/start-a-company/
6


➢Bridge structural funding gaps. States should thoroughly assess the structural
investment gaps in the growth process of economies and find innovative means
to bridge these gaps by incentivising investors (e.g., co-investment funds, a
financial toolkit for start-ups, centralised platforms for funding, bringing
together investors and start-ups, European Investment Bank funding, etc.).
➢Give
entrepreneurs
a
second
chance.
Volt
will
encourage
honest
entrepreneurs who have gone bankrupt to start another business so that they
can apply their previously acquired knowledge. A decisive distinction must be
made between honest and dishonest bankruptcies, with special bankruptcy and
discharge procedures for honest entrepreneurs (e.g., faster and less expensive
bankruptcy procedures or a shorter duration of negative rating). On the other
hand, the interests of creditors must be protected and the bankruptcy
procedure must be simple and as fast as possible for investors, so that a
company can fail more easily and quickly. The maximum duration of the
insolvency should be 2 to 3 years, depending on the size of the company and on
the assets that need to be sold (i.e., an efficient secondary market or not). In
this way the loss given default
decreases and thus the probability of receiving
10
credit in the system increases.
➢Support stock option pools and other employee shares, when a company is
not
publicly
listed,
through
tax
benefits,
to
encourage
employee
entrepreneurship and benefit from future returns (capital gains tax).
B. Funding support and sustainable finance
Support entrepreneurs by providing information and access to relevant sources of
financing. This entails thorough analysis of the existing funding sources at different
stages of business growth and enabling the private sector to fill the identified gaps
(e.g., “valleys of death”) through relevant structures and incentives.
➢Promote venture capital (VC) investments. Set tax incentives to make
venture capital investment and participation in business angel networks such as
the European Business Angel Network (EBAN) or business angel funds more
appealing for investors.
Tax relief on capital gains or providing loss relief on a
11
more favourable basis than the baseline tax system could support the
reduction of risk of investment in young, growing, innovative businesses. Tax
11 One national example of this is PIR in Italy. See Investment Europe, Italy’s PIR funds: Capitalising on
new instruments, available at
http://www.investmenteurope.net/regions/italy/italys-pir-funds-capitalising-on-new-instruments/
10 Loss given default - A core metric used to evaluate the creditworthiness of a corporation
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/l/lossgivendefault.asp
7


incentives should be regularly monitored and evaluated in order to reform
them or to create further incentives.12
➢Set up a European database with accredited angel investors, incubators,
and VC funds. Inclusion in the database should be decided by an independent
European network of people capable of evaluating investors, incubators, and
VC funds. The sources included in the database should also be monitored
regularly to ensure that they comply with the requirements set for the
inclusion in the database. This database can build on and expand the members’
directory of EBAN.13
➢Find innovative means to bridge investment gaps, especially in early stages
of start-ups, to incentivise other actors (e.g., government guarantees,
co-investment funds, financial tool-kit for start-ups, central funding platforms,
bringing together investors and start-ups).
➢Support direct additional funding to develop SMEs in strategic industries
and harmonise SME development among countries, regions, and provinces.
➢Set tax incentives for SME owners who reinvest surpluses in their business or
create jobs within the first three years of business.
➢Scale up the European Investment Bank (EIB) with a clear mandate to invest
in areas where there are "valleys of death" for start-ups (e.g., ticket sizes of
50,000 to 1,000,000) or a lack of available funding in strategic industries.
➢Standardise the definition of impact investment and enable institutional
investment in impact investment.
➢Create
incentives
for
institutional
investors to (co-)invest in socially
beneficial projects (e.g., infrastructure projects with a long time horizon).
C. Profits-for-all mentality
Volt wants to incentivise and value social entrepreneurship. To do so, Volt will:
➢Create coherent and standardised legal forms for social entrepreneurs and
introduce public certification.
13 EBAN is the European Trade Association for Business Angels, Seed Funds and Early Stage Market
Players, available at http://www.eban.org/
12 European Commission, Effectiveness of tax incentives for venture capital and business angels to
foster the investment of SMEs and startups, available at
https://op.europa.eu/de/publication-detail/-/publication/d4cd684a-6cf8-11e7-b2f2-01aa75ed71a1
8


➢Relieve tax constraints on human resources for social businesses.14
➢Develop incentive schemes so that companies (including SMEs) adopt the best
practices
of
other
companies,
especially
regarding
continuous
learning/training.
➢Ensure that tax policies are in place that proactively address inequalities,
such as the introduction of a progressive inheritance tax to prevent the
concentration of wealth.
D. Invest in the environmental resilience of all those living in
Europe
Volt wants to close the financing gap between what is needed for all EU citizens to
live in a resilient society and current expenditure and what funding is currently
available. This includes:
➢Expanding the availability of public financing for government action on
climate change at the EU level.
➢Setting incentives for individuals and companies to further invest in
equitable adaptation (without exacerbating the inequality of outcomes
between those who can and those who cannot invest in environmental
outcomes).
➢Building technical capacity in government, the research community, and
business on climate adaptation planning and monitoring.
➢Supporting locally driven actions across Europe to prepare for and respond to
localised climatic impact.
E. Service mentality15
Public administrations will be incentivised to offer effective and easy-to-understand
support to members of the private sector to ensure that processes are simple and
regulations are easy to follow. To achieve this objective, Volt proposes to:
15
For more details see “Smart State”, “Administrative effectiveness to reduce waste and improve
service quality”
14 A social business is a non-dividend company that is created to address and solve a social problem. See
Yunus, What is a social business, available at https://www.yunussb.com/about-us
9


➢Dramatically reduce waiting times by rewarding and evaluating offices
according to time- and service-related measures (KPI).
➢Strengthen online services and integrate data across the administration. A
EU-wide uniform digital ID would speed-up this process and reduce friction.
➢Work towards completely paperless processes and harmonised Information
and Communication Technology (ICT) standards to allow efficient services.
10


III.
Revive
innovation
in
our
economies
and
promote industries of the future
Innovation should be at the heart of the long-term strategies of both companies and
governments. However, despite statements of intent and several good public sector
initiatives, many European economies still struggle to create an environment that
supports innovation.
A. Idea generation and supportive infrastructure
Incentivise idea- and knowledge generation in European economies to stimulate
growth. To achieve this, Volt proposes the following steps:
➢Ease and improve the flow of information and knowledge from academic
institutions and their applied research to the private sector. Additionally,
increase the application of research results (e.g., via research institutes,
corporate research funds, and public-private research centres).16
➢Create and support joined research facilities and innovation hubs, by, for
example, concentrating administrative efforts on the roll-out of fibre optic
networks, public and free WiFi, and public clouds with servers in each country.
Affiliated institutes should also be established to foster collaboration between
the academic and private sectors.
➢Support and fund pan-European research in key areas.
Volt supports EU
17
policy in defining and funding key areas. We propose to synchronise research
funding
processes
and
allocation
at
national
and
European levels to
democratise and align the selection of research areas to be supported.18
➢Facilitate and increase the attractiveness of obtaining an expert visa,
especially after university degrees within an EU Member State (e.g., after MINT
master), to attract talent (e.g., the US model, where a student visa
automatically gives the right to work for one year).
18 For more information see “Smart State”, “Support Research”
17 European Commission, What is Horizon, available at
https://ec.europa.eu/programmes/horizon2020/en/what-horizon-2020
16 Einstein Centre for Digital Future, news, available at https://www.digital-future.berlin
11


➢Prioritise improvements to digital infrastructure and define standards for
open data to meet the future needs of the private sector and the public.
B. Supportive regulation
Push government interventions to guide, foster, and protect European innovation.
Volt will do this by promoting the following measures:
➢Strengthen international enforcement of patent laws by making them
applicable
to
international competition and penalising any imports by
companies that do not comply with these standards anywhere in the world.
Initial consideration should be given to sector-specific differences.
➢Reform patent law by increasing transparency and setting a deadline to
specify patents, ensuring that unused patents do not block new inventions,
while also ensuring profitability of innovation.
➢Set
standards,
regulations,
and
guidelines
for
the
development
of
transformational technologies, such as artificial intelligence (AI).
➢Unlock innovative and disruptive start-ups, while still requiring these
companies to comply with standards (e.g., contributions to the healthcare
system, pension system, etc.).
➢Standardise contracts (where possible) across the EU for different kinds of
businesses and share best-practices (e.g., start-up ownership contracts).
➢Review the availability, necessity, and cost of notary services and consider
incentives for using online legal services, such as online certification of legal
documents
for
online
business
registration
or
a
simpler
process
for
standardised contracts to reduce the burden on start-ups.
C. New markets and new energy
Support research and development (R&D) in growing markets with strategic
relevance, e.g., green energy and Industry 4.0 initiatives. Volt will support growth in
these markets by taking the following steps:
➢Ensure long term political strategies to create investment security for
companies.
➢Use the "public weight" (standards, fiscal incentives) to support energy
efficiency in households and industry.
12


➢Support an integrated strategy for all EU Member States by moving toward a
single energy market and EU-wide programmes to open up the renewable
energy sector.19
➢Create
"dedicated
research
and
test
innovation
zones"
for
new
20
technologies to allow regions to set up such zones for sandbox approaches
with light regulation. These zones could be used by start-ups and tech
companies in the area of autonomous driving, drones and similar spheres
where AI has to be trained in a physical environment.
To ensure that the zones
21
will benefit whole Europe, the transferability of the application to other EU
countries must be guaranteed.
➢Regulation of space and use of the space technologies22
In the digital age, space is of central, strategic importance for society and the
economy. It is critical infrastructure and key to future technologies such as
autonomous driving or Industry 4.0. Its applications can further contribute to
the worldwide reduction of poverty and to increase social fairness. Given the
networking requirements in a modern industrial and information society, its
importance will continue to grow.
The EU has the most space agencies in the world and the European Space
Agency (ESA), an intergovernmental entity where not all European Union
Member States participate and where countries outside the EU also participate.
Volt sees the need to further integrate European space institutions, to ensure
stable and long-term financing, to enhance efficiency and collaboration, and to
increase synergies. Many of the global issues, such as the militarization of
space, space debris and traffic management, or human exploration of Mars and
the Moon, fall within the scope of international space cooperation and
international space law.
22 For more details see separate document: Volt Space Policy
21 There are many "Ghost cities" in semi-urban Spain that would perfectly provide the space needed for
these innovation zones without the danger of hurting actual people.
20 Innovation zones are very successful in emerging economies such as Shanghai, or Shenzhen
19 For more details, see “EU Reform, “EU neighbourhood policy”
13


IV.
Foster a European Artificial Intelligence
initiative
Artificial intelligence (AI) is transforming the economy, society, and social and
political systems in Europe and globally. The societal impact of AI can be either very
beneficial (e.g., safer roads, personalised healthcare, and efficient use of resources) or
lead to unfavourable outcomes (e.g., technological unemployment, increasing
inequality, or lethal autonomous weapons).
There is an urgent need for action, as technological development and practical
applications are advancing at a rapid pace.
The debate has to be societal, not just technical. AI not only has a direct impact on
business models, labour markets, and income distribution, but also raises fundamental
ethical questions about human–machine interaction, the nature of work, citizens’
privacy, and the distribution of benefits.
The development of AI requires a European approach to achieve critical mass for
global competition. Only then can we ensure that AI technology builds on human
values and, together, build a social union to mitigate undesirable effects of AI, such
as involuntary unemployment, which will be felt in labour markets across Europe.
Volt stands for a European AI initiative to:
​
➢Build an enforceable European legal and ethical framework.
➢Build Europe’s competence in AI research and development and AI literacy.
➢Prepare to address negative socio-economic consequences.
​
Member states’ AI efforts should be aligned with this European approach according to
the specific strengths of the countries.
14


A. Develop the ethical and legal foundation and boundaries
for AI development
1. Develop and adopt AI ethics guidelines
Volt welcomes all EU efforts to develop such guidelines and binding standards, e.g.,
through the European AI Alliance. Volt believes that these guidelines should reflect
the following values:
➢Machines are instruments to enhance human welfare.
➢A European guideline shall regulate AI-generated content, with a specific
focus on preventing the manipulation of public opinion. Content generated by
AI applications (e.g., articles, images, sound, and video) must be labelled
transparently.
➢Citizens clearly own their own data.
➢Fair taxation of the digital economy contributes to fair distribution of AI
benefits.
2. Develop a legal and regulatory framework
A legal and regulatory framework for AI development is needed to ensure that these
core values are being applied in practice, including the following building blocks.
➢Establish a high-level government AI Coordination Office. Volt recommends
establishing a High-Level AI Coordination Office at the European Commission
(EC) in the office of the President of the EC and a similar office in each Member
State. These offices would need to have: i) the competence to guide AI
development across different sectors, ii) the mandate to develop a coherent
strategy, and iii) the legal authority to monitor that the emerging legal and
regulatory framework is coherent and consistent with European values.
​
➢Develop a European Digital Bill of Rights as an overarching legal framework
and binding international legal instrument to govern the internet in Europe.
This instrument should guarantee individual and social rights in Europe,
including the right to access the internet, and protection of fundamental
rights in the digital environment, such as privacy, data protection, freedom of
expression, information and association online, and stakeholder-based internet
governance. Principles of net neutrality and an open internet are at the core of
an internet system that guarantees these rights. Volt will advocate for the EU
to include digital rights and freedoms in its agreements with third countries.
15


➢Ensure effective implementation of the EU General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR). Data protection authorities need to be adequately
equipped to (i) to ensure consistent implementation across the EU so that
companies do not migrate towards soft-protection havens; and (ii) to help small
and medium-sized organisations comply with the complex rules so that this law
does not inadvertently privilege large international companies.
​
➢Implement regulation requiring algorithms to be ‘explainable’ and comply
with the criteria of trustworthy AI
when used for high-risk applications or
23
for decision making directly affecting citizens and consumers, in both the public
and private sector. A new European AI Auditing Institution shall transform the
Trustworthy AI recommendations of the high-level expert group on AI into
European standards. It shall be mandated to set up a network of AI
Certification Institutes authorised to certify the conformity of AI systems with
these standards. The AI Auditing Institution will work closely with the proposed
Center for European Research on AI (CERAI, see below), which will provide AI
monitoring frameworks and AI oversight bodies. Human auditing teams and
appropriate AI tools will ensure that regulation is enforced. For high-risk
applications, these tools will enable continuous monitoring.
​
➢Assure fair taxation in the digital economy. Volt fully supports the EC
proposal to levy a 3% tax on the turnover of large digital companies in the EU
country where this turnover is being generated to avoid tax evasion by shifting
their net profits to tax havens.
➢Develop a common EU position on banning autonomous weapons. Start a
debate on the risks of autonomous weapons that use AI and can, for example,
make a decision to fire without any human intervention. Currently, EU countries
have different positions on this issue and different strategies to address it.24
Consider adoption of an international legally binding instrument prohibiting
the development, production, and use of such weapons under the auspices of
the UN.
➢Cybersecurity. European and national institutions engaged in cybersecurity
shall be supported by the proposed CERAI delivery streams against adversarial
AI attacks and rogue AI.
24 Stepan Denk and Daan Kayser, Keeping Control: European Positions on Lethal Autonomous Weapon
Systems, available at https://www.paxforpeace.nl/publications/all-publications/keeping-control
23 An Explainable AI or Transparent AI is an artificial intelligence (AI) whose actions and rationale can be
easily understood by humans. It contrasts with "black box" AI whose inputs and outputs (and the
relationships between them) are known, but whose internal structure or working is not well, or at all,
understood and where even their designers cannot explain why the AI arrived at a specific decision. See
Samek, Explainable Artificial Intelligence: Understanding, visualising and interpreting deep learning
models, available at: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1708.08296.pdf
16


B. Build Europe’s competence in artificial intelligence (AI)
development
Volt supports a concerted European effort to build artificial intelligence (AI)
competence, with the following key building blocks: i) research and innovation, ii)
education and training of human resources, and iii) infrastructure. The following
proposed actions will contribute to this effort.
➢Invest EU wide in AI research and development. Volt welcomes the European
Commission’s announcement of an AI research and development initiative ,
25
including a budget target of EUR 20 billion per year by 2020 for supporting
multi-national efforts. Research topics should include not only technical
aspects but also societal challenges and changes, including in labour markets,
and how these can be addressed, without hampering AI innovation and
development.
➢Center for European Research on AI (CERAI). The challenges of rapidly
growing AI capabilities and market failures can not be met by the existing
initiatives and organisations alone. Volt strongly recommends establishing a
new international organisation fully committed to continuously delivering
high-quality AI software and frameworks, where markets have no incentive to
build these. An ideal research environment will attract the best AI experts who
will push the boundaries of their disciplines. Funded by the EU and Member
States, this organisation will promote security-related AI research at an
unprecedented pace and support the Economic Renaissance in collaboration
with the AI-on-demand platform. We aim to make CERAI a world-famous
institute and leader in its field, similar to CERN.
➢Scale up education in digital skills for all ages, starting in kindergarten. In a
technology-driven society, education is key to fostering social inclusion, as well
as awareness of the benefits and risks of technology use. In order to teach
factual knowledge about AI, innovative didactic methods should be adopted,
such as adaptive AI-based teaching and active learning. Centrally maintained
repositories (e.g., by CERAI) make it possible to provide up-to-date exercises for
learners. In addition to technical competences, such as coding, Volt advocates
the training of behaviours and skills that lead to a healthy and sustainable
lifestyle and that preserve mental health and social well-being in a digital
environment.
➢Develop a European "AI-on-demand platform". AI development requires
major investments to boost the EU’s technological and industrial capacities,
25 European Commision, A European approach to artificial intelligence, available at
https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/european-approach-artificial-intelligence
17


both in the private and public sectors. A high priority is to make AI available and
accessible to all in order to spread its benefits widely. The platform will provide
a single access point for all users to relevant AI resources in the EU,
including
knowledge,
data
repositories,
computing
power
(cloud,
high-performance computing), tools, and algorithms. It will offer services and
provide support to potential users of the technology; analysing the business
case behind AI in their specific environment and helping them to integrate AI
solutions into their processes, products and services. To implement the
platform, the EC plans to build on the existing network of more than 400
Digital Innovation Hubs.
➢Provide access to ‘Fast Internet’. Enable high speed data transmission and
ensure widespread access to the internet, also and especially outside urban
centres. This can entail introducing minimum standards for speed, coverage,
and
interconnectivity
at
European level, regulated access to minimise
discrimination
agains
smaller
users
(‘net
neutrality’),
or
public-private
co-investment26
➢Attract
private
investment
for
AI
development.
Increase
European
Investment Bank’s support for AI investments from an initial level of EUR 500
million in 2018-2020 to at least EUR 1 billion/year after 2020, and rapidly launch
the pan-European Venture Capital Funds-of-Funds programme – Venture EU,
a EUR 2.1 billion fund to boost investment in innovative start-up and scale-up
companies across Europe.
C. Prepare Society for artificial intelligence (AI) related
structural changes
The advent of Artificial intelligence (AI) is a cause of anxiety for many people. These
concerns need to be taken seriously and addressed. Otherwise, widespread anxiety
may slow a necessary transformation and populists may use anxiety to spread
divisiveness with false promises and simple solutions. This anxiety manifests itself in
the labour market, in the form of a widespread fear of job losses and job quality
depreciation, although predictions about the actual impact of AI vary widely.
Volt proposes a three-pronged approach: secure – prepare – create.
➢Secure livelihood in the case of job loss. The prospect that AI-related
technologies might reduce the overall demand for human labour and increase
structural unemployment calls for a new concept of social protection de-linked
from traditional employment. We propose EU-wide standards for policies on
26 E.g.: Germany’s ‘Gigabit Investment Fund’ with an estimated EUR 12 billion, partly financed from
broadband licences
18


Universal Basic Income (UBI) to avoid widespread extreme poverty due to job
loss caused by automation through new technologies. This must include social
security coverage for all forms of employment.27
➢Prepare for a changing work environment. Instead of waiting until jobs are
lost, it is necessary to move from an unemployment- to an employment
insurance with a focus on preventive programmes aimed at maintaining
lifelong employability. This includes setting up a programme for lifelong
learning. The programme would become an umbrella for Europe-wide
initiatives to prepare European workers for the future of work. It would include
subsidised training programmes on new tools and technologies, as well as
career counselling. It would target workers already affected by technological
change in their workplace or at risk of being affected in the near future. Priority
would be given to people who do not have the economic means for education
and training. Training activities should be accredited by recognised training and
academic institutions, and participants would receive certifications recognised
throughout Europe.
➢Shape the future of work. Initiate a public consultation process on ‘Work
4.0’ at European level to explore the shift in fundamental values related to
work across Europe and support policy formulation at EU and Member State
level. It can draw on practical experience from the German multi-stakeholder
Work 4.0 process
and from the Danish flexicurity model, which combines
28
generous public and social welfare benefits with flexible labour markets. Aside
from Universal Basic Income (see above), a point that deserves particular
attention is: Develop a Working Time Choice Act
at the European level,
29
that gives workers more time-sovereignty and provides rules for negotiating
working arrangements that balance workers’ and companies’ flexibility needs.
Particular attention should be paid to the growing number of self-employed,
start-ups, and crowd-workers, which are so far neither well represented
politically nor organised collectively, and hence usually have less negotiation
power.
29
DJB
–
Deutscher
Juristinnenbund,
Konzeption
eines
Wahlarbeitszeitgesetzes,
available
at
https://www.djb.de/themen/wahlarbeitszeit/wazg-konzept/#_ftn9
28 BMAS - German Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, “Weissbuch Working 4.0”, available at
https://www.bmas.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/EN/PDF-Publikationen/a883-white-paper.pdf?__blob=p
ublicationFile&v=3
27 See chapter V. for further details
19


V.
Shape the future of work and tackle (youth)
unemployment with innovative concepts
A. Future of work – new working schemes
Volt wants to introduce measures to curb unemployment and promote new models of
work. We therefore need to increase the flexibility of our workforce to better meet
changing demands in changing economies. At the same time, we need to develop
adequate legal and social frameworks and protections for these new situations. New
technological possibilities enable new ways of working. Policies have to harness this
potential by providing adequate frameworks for decentralised and more flexible
working models.
➢Flexibility and work-life balance: Volt supports a Working Time Choice Act
and will become the recognised political voice for the growing number of
start-ups,
self-employed,
crowd
and
gig
workers
and
working
parents/guardians. Many people are leaving the traditional nine-to-five job
routine and feel that autonomy is more empowering and satisfactory. Cross
border cooperation in the economy requires flexible working hours and offers
opportunities for people who want to work more autonomously and for those
who have fewer chances to find a permanent job.
Furthermore, flexible
30
working hours primarily improve the work-life balance for working parents.31
Any new policy to encourage and regulate work flexibility will have to balance
at least three principles: (1) enabling more flexible, digital, mobile forms of
working, while at the same time, (2) protecting workers’ health, their continued
employability, and their basic income at all life stages, and (3) increasing the
international competitiveness of companies.
Flexible legal and tax-related solutions need to be found for citizens who are
working in one EU Member State and residing in another or working in multiple
Member States throughout the year. The current regime of double-taxation
regimes is too rigid to reflect the reality of many EU citizens and can therefore
act as a deterrent to free movement within the EU.
➢Pilot more flexible “more-people-working-less” models. The sharp rise in
productivity has led to an imbalance in the labour markets. A reduction in
31 OECD, 2016, Be Flexible!, available at
https://www.oecd.org/els/family/Be-Flexible-Backgrounder-Workplace-Flexibility.pdf
30 EPSC, 2016, The Future of Work - Skills and Resilience for a World of Change, available at
https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/5236ecf2-ac93-11e6-aab7-01aa75ed71a1
20


individual working hours would absorb much of the resulting structural
unemployment.32
➢Introduce measures to empower both women and men with children to have
a successful career. Volt will introduce the following measures that will
benefit all types of parents (single men, women, heterosexual and homosexual
couples, etc.).
○
Implement Family Working Time following parental leave to allow
both parents to return to work on a part-time basis, with the possible
compensation of reduced income at certain stages of life (e.g., during
early infancy, as foreseen in the German Parental Leave Act) , to better
33
balance between parents’ responsibilities for family, care, and income.34
Family Working Time would follow parental leave and last up to three
years. Both parents, for example, would work 80% of full-time, and the
loss of wages would be compensated with a degressive rate based on
income level and duration.35
○
Enable equal paid maternity and paternity leave for a specific period
of time, and additional time off that can be shared according to the
parents’ preferences. Both parents should be heavily incentivised to take
time off from work. The duration of leave can be decided according to
the countries’ existing frameworks,
but equality must be a priority.
36
○
Incentivise in-house childcare facilities and forms of work that enable
flexible adaptation to parents’ needs.
➢Foster cooperatives as they are proven to be more resilient during financial
crises and allow for more economic democracy, citizen participation, greater
corporate social responsibility and efficient delivery of goods and services. Volt
supports cooperatives (e.g., European cooperative societies) as an inherently
European form of company with high labour standards and profit- share.
36 See Belle, Paternity and parental leave policies across the European Union, available at
https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR1666.html
And Eurofound https://www.eurofound.europa.eu/topic/work-life-balance
35 FES (Ed.), Müller, Neumann, Wrolich, Familienarbeitszeit, available at
http://library.fes.de/pdf-files/dialog/10335.pdf
34 OECD,  2016, Be Flexible! Background brief on how workplace flexibility can help European
employees to balance work and family, available at
https://www.oecd.org/els/family/Be-Flexible-Backgrounder-Workplace-Flexibility.pdf
33 BMFSFJ, Manuela Schwesig: Mütter und Väter wollen heute beides: Familie und Beruf, available at
https://www.bmfsfj.de/bmfsfj/aktuelles/reden-und-interviews/manuela-schwesig--muetter-und-vaeter-
wollen-heute-beides--familie-und-beruf/75720?view=DEFAULT
32 Jean-Marie Perbost, Work more? Work less? What should be done so that we can all work and
perform better?, p. 48,  available at
https://gef.eu/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/Work_more_work_less.pdf
21


➢Introduce temporary work reduction programmes in crisis-stricken industries
to protect workers by subsidising part of their salaries. These schemes are
work-share programmes where a company can reduce the working hours of
people (and their salaries) or even lay them off temporarily. Subsidies cover a
certain percentage of the salary. There is a maximum period of time during
which these programmes can be applied. If implemented successfully, they
reduce the need to lay off employees during a crisis and rehire them
afterwards. This is one of the key pillars to providing more flexibility to
employers.
➢Pilot programmes to take advantage of decentralised digital work, such as
lending devices to low income and unemployed individuals, using existing
online training platforms, or setting up internet-enabled libraries with trainers
to teach people how to find jobs and earn a living remotely via the internet.
➢Design remote-working models especially for the elderly, assuming that
digital literacy will soon increase among older citizens as well.
➢Incentivise part-time schemes, e.g., through subsidies or tax deductions,
introduce relocation allowances and on-the-job training for the long-term
unemployed. We advocate a telework policy like in the Netherlands, where
employers cannot refuse an employee’s request to work remotely unless they
can clearly explain why their presence in the workplace is essential.
➢Assess and implement a best practice system for dual vocational education
and training across Europe.
➢Introduce a paid, voluntary, one-year "Civic fellowship" that allows young
people to assist the state in various tasks ranging from classic administrative
jobs to military and social services. Combine this fellowship with geographical
mobility programmes to encourage European exchange.
B. Preventive measures, targeted re-skilling and reintegration
According to Eurostat data, 3.722 million young people (under 25years of age) were
unemployed in 2017 in the EU28, a decrease of 380,000 as compared with October
2016. The lowest youth unemployment rates were observed in Germany (6.6%) and
the Czech Republic (7.2%), while the highest were recorded in Greece (40.2% in
August 2017), Spain (38.2%) and Italy (34.7%). Although these figures demonstrate
progress, youth unemployment still remains high.
Despite attempts like the Youth Employment Initiative, Youth Guarantee, and the
European Solidarity Corps to mitigate youth unemployment, young people starting
their careers continue to face challenging structural problems. The longstanding
22


practice of offering unpaid internships, inadequate protection services for young
workers, and inconsistencies between the job market and skills acquired during
education persist. A better exchange of information between educational institutions,
employers and labour offices is necessary in order to increase the interface between
education and available employment.
Volt wants to prepare the future workforce and the currently unemployed to be
competitive in the labour market. Special consideration should be given to avoiding
unemployment through preventive measures. This could include reducing the number
of pupils leaving school without any degree and responding to job shortages before
they occur.
➢Establish
a
European
educational programme. The programme would
become an umbrella for Europe-wide initiatives supported by a wide range of
schools and institutions to prepare the European workforce for the future. It
would include subsidised training programmes for new tools and technologies
as well as career counselling.
It would be targeted to those who are already affected by technological change
in their workplace or are at risk of being affected in the near future. Priority
would be given to people who would otherwise not have economic means to
retrain. Training activities should be accredited by recognised training and
academic institutions. Trainees would then receive certifications recognised
throughout the European Union.
➢Lifelong learning for employability. Volt supports a strategy ‘From an
Unemployment to an Employment Insurance’, a preventive scheme focused on
maintaining employability. Volt advocates for the immediate adoption of
‘Erasmus Pro’, an European mobility programme for young people to fund
200,000 two-year apprenticeships each year with an estimated initial budget of
EUR 5 billion per year.
Volt supports Individual Long-Term Accounts that
37
promote lifelong learning, backed by a regular bonus for lifelong learning and
retraining to remain employable in a fast-changing labour market. For people
nearing retirement, retraining or early retirement must be considered, taking
into account personal welfare and prosperity as well as budgetary constraints
of the government (i.e., careful attention to the long-term sustainability of the
pension system).
➢Retrain workers in long-term shrinking sectors for promising industries,
promote lifelong learning by using existing technologies and digital offerings
such as massive open online courses (MOOCs). Subsidise on-the-job training
and training programmes of companies that retrain people and hire a certain
percentage of them.
37 Notre Europe Jacques Delors Institute, Erasmus Pro: For a Million 'Young European Apprentices’ by
2020, available at
http://www.institutdelors.eu/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/youthemployment-jdi-may15.pdf?pdf=ok
23


➢Analyse
Youth
Employment
Initiative (YEI) measures and data in a
standardised, transparent, and coherent way and set up a database on best
practices on reintegrating measures that can be used by all Member States.38
Additionally, ensure that unemployed young people finish the measures they
are supposed to do.
➢Invest in training centres linked to the regions’ artisanal excellence (e.g.,
Naples shall create more training paths for tailors/dairy producers).
➢Support the development of young unemployed people’s networks by
setting up subsidised mentoring programmes with experienced people from all
sectors.
➢Use pilot matching algorithms based on data analytics to predict and
respond to future job shortages at a geographic and sectoral level. In this way,
preventive measures can be tailored before job losses occur data from external
sources, such as social media, could also be included.39
C. Ease job seeking and create fluid job markets
Remove barriers that slow down or block the matching between job seekers and
offers through the use of digital tools, platforms, data analytics, and targeted
language training, to thereby foster better cooperation with the private sector.
➢Create a European Labour Platform to match the workforce with jobs
across Europe. Volt wants to expand on the EURESa European Labour Platform
to address the different needs in Member States, assess an EU-wide supply and
demand gap in skills and competences, and incentivise a balance. A single
digital European job portal would reduce the skills mismatch. By taking into
account real-time information on skill demand, it could improve policy-making
and labour exchanges between Member States. By involving universities and
research institutions, it could also help close the skill gap and promote
transparency between academia, its graduates, and industry needs. The
39 For more details see Ease job seeking and create fluid job markets
38 In Italy, the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy, the Chamber of Commerce, Industry, Handicrafts and
Agriculture and Google developed a traineeship scheme called ‘Growing Digital’, which included online
training sessions, laboratory sessions and paid traineeships (6 months). Companies could receive
incentives of up to  EUR 6,000 for the provision of internship places. 3,000 such traineeships were
planned. See Google Europe Blog, Young and Digital: Google Signs the European Pact4Youth, available
at https://europe.googleblog.com/2015/11/young-and-digital-google-signs-european.html; Crescere in
Digitale, available at http://www.crescereindigitale.it/
24


European job mobility portal EURES
and the Skills Panorama of Cedefop
40
41
would constitute the building blocks of such an initiative (for jobs and
internships).
Combined with a “reintegration package” that includes (1) an
42
intensive language course and (2) financial support for relocation, overall
unemployment could be reduced by linking supply and demand.
➢Start the long-term unification process of labour markets by initiating
negotiations on a pilot “European” labour contract, a homogenous labour
agreement which takes into account national specificities (e.g., quality of life,
cost of living). Volt stands for a European approach to social development with
practical minimum standards for social protection, decent work, and pay,
enabling a successful digital transformation that contributes to both more
prosperity and better working conditions in the EU. Volt envisions that
universal social protection and an adequate income are central pillars of EU
policy making.
➢Collaborate with private sector teams to learn about and implement
innovative and efficient methods for training, retraining, and allocating the
unemployed.43
➢Reward young people who invest in acquiring language skills, which,
combined with the willingness to change residence, can help to balance supply
and demand in the labour market (see European Labour Platform above).
➢Encourage cooperation between management and workers.
➢Harmonise qualifications to reduce search costs for employers and allow job
seekers to compete in markets other than their home market.
➢Reduce administrative burden for employees when moving to another
country (pension, income tax, health insurance, etc).
43 Crescere in Digitale, Crescere in Digitale Riparter, available at http://www.crescereindigitale.it/
42 Cf. Berger, T. & Frey, C.B.,2016, Digitalization, Jobs and Convergence in Europe: Strategies for closing
the skills gap, available at
https://www.oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk/downloads/reports/SCALE_Digitalisation_Final.pdf
41 Cedefop, European Commission, Skills Panorama, available at
http://skillspanorama.cedefop.europa.eu/en
40 European Commission, EURES, available at https://ec.europa.eu/eures/public/en/homepage
25


VI.
Social policies
➢Guarantee a minimum income above poverty levels for full-time work. Volt
envisions universal social protection and an adequate income to become
central pillars of EU policy. This requires a long-term perspective combined with
short-term measures.
○
Volt advocates for strengthening existing minimum wage schemes
across the EU, initially with the modest goal of converging on a minimum
poverty
threshold
of
40% of
the
corresponding
median
income
(“extreme poverty”). No person working full-time should be earning
below this threshold. We further advocate differentiating the level of
minimum wages by region (not by country), by loosening collective
agreements.44
○
The schemes should not only be linked to a traditional job search, but
also to the possible development of a new business or even an
(unpaid) social activity.
○
Volt endorses the principles proposed by the Social Platform for a
European Directive on minimum income. This includes, non-exhaustively,
a set of common methodologies for defining adequacy, common
approaches to coverage, avoiding exceptions and back doors, and efforts
to ensure implementation and common information requirements.
Furthermore, it should follow the principles of proactive granting of
benefits
and
enabling
gender
mainstreaming,
gender
impact
assessment, and gender budgeting and be flexible in addressing the
needs of specific groups (e.g., single parents, long-term unemployed,
older people, young people, etc.).45
➢Ensure minimum child benefits across Europe. Volt aims at harmonising child
benefits to minimum standards
across the EU. Universal child benefits
46
significantly reduce child poverty. Efficient family policy measures such as the
provision of adequate child benefits lead to better opportunities to secure
work-life balance and to protect children from social exclusion.47
47 STĂNESCU, NEMȚANU, 2015, available at Family Benefits In Member States Of The European Union:
A Comparative Perspective; For more details see “Social Equality”, “Alleviate poverty”, “Overall issues
linked to poverty, Social benefits and healthcare”
46 Linked to national median income
45 Cf. European Parliament 2017, Minimum Income Policies in EU Member States, p. 40., available at
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/STUD/2017/595365/IPOL_STU%282017%29595365_
EN.pdf
44 Living wage foundation, What is the real living wage, available at
https://www.livingwage.org.uk/what-real-living-wage
26


➢Venture into Unconditional Basic Income (UBI): Volt supports large-scale
experiments with unconditional basic income to provide a solid knowledge
base on which to decide the merits of this novel approach to social protection.
This is especially important as technology will advance to automate many
current jobs, potentially leading to widespread unemployment. As the total
wealth
of
society
will
continue
to
increase
through these measures,
unconditional basic income could become a relevant instrument to ensure
social stability through the coming revolution of digitization.
➢Start-up capital. Volt endorses the idea of a start-up capital for every young
person in the EU. Such start-up capital can be seen as a social inheritance that
enables a young person to develop their talents, choose a career, or start up a
business, irrespective of their parents’ social status and wealth. Everyone is
eligible, but depending on their parents’ income/wealth, it is either a grant
(poor parents) or a soft loan
(wealthy parents) with a possible graduation in
48
between. Eligible expenditures cover a wide range and definition of life and
work-enhancing
activities.
Volt
proposes
large-scale
experiments
with
unconditional start-up capital to learn how to best structure such a policy
instrument.
➢Integrate the increasing number of on-demand workers (gig economy) into
the social system by providing a framework that allows for minimum standards
and assures the accountability of employers.
○
Extend social security coverage to self-employed (opt-in option). The
inclusion of self-employed individuals in the solidarity community of the
statutory pension insurance system would grant them the same rights
and obligations as all other insured persons. The statutory pension
insurance obligation should apply primarily to younger people who take
up self-employment after the obligation enters into force. There should
also be more opportunities to reduce contributions during start up a
new business and in periods with low income (e.g., by an EU fund
supporting programme for entrepreneurs in early stages of their
business). In addition, those who are already covered by an obligatory
system or other p existing voluntary arrangements for retirement
income should be entitled to receive an exemption from the obligation
of coverage by the statutory pension insurance system. This applies, for
example, to farmers, freelancers, and lawyers, who are covered by
occupational pension schemes in many countries.
48 A soft loan is a loan with no interest or a below-market rate of interest, See Investopedia, Soft Loan,
available at https://www.investopedia.com/terms/s/softloan.asp#ixzz5IWTw7Sqp
27


➢Rethink the retirement age and whether it is necessary to differentiate the
retirement age by sectors (allowing people to work for longer in less physically
demanding areas).
➢Part-time work models for the elderly, which could help mitigate the pension
funding problems that exist in some Member States. This could also assist in
keeping more people in the labour market for longer.
28


VII.
Develop economically disadvantaged areas
and champion trade
Fight inequalities among European regions by enabling disadvantaged areas to
recover and/or invest in their future. Continue to champion free, fair and sustainable
trade around the world while improving the enforcement of EU-standards for all
imported goods. In particular, we aim to ensure that non-EU partners fully comply
with our standards. Instead of just maximising economic growth, modern societies
should work to eliminate social inequalities and guarantee a decent quality of life for
all. Governments should not be evaluated on their economic performance but on
whether they succeed in strengthening cohesion among their citizens.
A. Develop economically disadvantaged areas
➢Create jobs by sponsoring smart and environmentally friendly structural
investments
in
disadvantaged regions. After years of attempts, blind
transfers have proven inefficient and disadvantaged regions are often isolated
from the more productive areas of Europe. Europe needs a serious and
coordinated plan to create real and long-term value. Volt aims not only to
create new jobs but also to reduce socio-economic disparities between regions
and to promote autonomous and greener power production. This might be
achieved through:
○
Extending the European high-speed railway.
○
Investing in local clean energy production sites or pollution-eating
highways.49
○
Improving accessibility and connectivity for rural regions to suburban
and urban areas.
There is a wide range of options to achieve the much needed transformation of
our society towards more sustainable and integrative models. Volt proposes to:
○
Create a better coordinated joint strategy between EU institutions and
Member States.50
50 Instead of merely and randomly distributing EU funds to proposed projects, without any
comprehensive and long-term strategy.
49 Pollution-eating concrete is a paving material that actually eats pollution, which could soon become a
crucial tool for improving air quality in urban areas. The new concrete is coated with titanium dioxide,
which is a photocatalytic material, meaning it removes the nitrogen oxides and uses sunlight to convert
them into harmless nitrate that is washed away by rain. See Ford,CNN, Could pollution-eating concrete
clean up our urban jungles?, available at
http://edition.cnn.com/2010/TECH/innovation/08/06/concrete.pollution.solution/index.html
29


○
Increase the share of the EU budget allocated to these projects. Some of
the investments could also be financed through bond sales to the ECB.
Based on the example of Obama’s American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
(ARRA),
we believe this will lead to the creation of hundreds of thousands of
51
new jobs distributed in disadvantaged regions. Moreover, it will provide
immediate opportunities for all Europeans who are currently excluded from the
labour market.
➢Create EU-wide digital platforms to ensure accountability and transparency
in the use of EU funds. Huge infrastructural projects can carry the risk of
wasting
significant
resources
through
corruption,
embezzlement,
and
non-deployment.
Volt will create a monitoring body to ensure transparency
52
and that all funds deployed in past and new projects directly reach those in
need and are not hoarded through criminality and incompetence (cf. Obama’s
ARRA.)53
➢Foster the transfer of knowledge and skills to increase productivity and
reduce imbalances. Volt proposes to fund pan-European research programmes
and initiatives in order to include lagging regions in high-standard/advanced
production methods. Access to and diffusion of knowledge pushes the process
of technological convergence. Programmes (both research and concrete
initiatives) should be focused on issues such as digital transformation for SMEs
and micro-enterprises, the development of sustainable drive technology and
the production of clean energy from renewable energy sources.
➢Reorientate cohesion and structural funds towards education and training
in economically disadvantaged areas. Too often, we have seen European
funds being spent on unnecessarily large infrastructure projects that were not
needed. For example, large motorways or airports have been funded in regions
that do not have the economic activity needed to make the investment
worthwhile. Furthermore, funds are sometimes spent in areas where no further
infrastructure is needed because there are no other projects to invest in.
Instead, these funds and efforts should be redirected to projects that are really
needed, such as modernising poorly funded schools and universities, training
the
unemployed
or
low-skilled,
and
supporting
young,
innovative
53 Federal Register,  Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board, available at
https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/recovery-accountability-and-transparency-board
52 Italy’s Grandi Opere (“Great Public Works”) that the government launched in 2001; after 14 years,
only 8.3% of projects were completed, 57% of initiatives were in “project-level status”, and costs rose
by 40% because of corruption. See Il Sole 24 Ore, Così la corruzione «brucia» il reddito, available at
http://www.ilsole24ore.com/art/commenti-e-idee/2016-01-28/cosi-corruzione-brucia-reddito-103931.s
html?uuid=ACVww1IC&refresh_ce=1
51 In 2009, the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) of the Obama Administration
unleashed public work projects worth 1 billion dollars, creating 20,000 jobs and rejuvenating federal
infrastructures. See The balance, ARRA: Details, Pros and Cons, available at
https://www.thebalance.com/arra-details-3306299
30


entrepreneurs. Sometimes the most deprived areas have modern facilities but
lack investment in education and human capital. If these regions are to catch
up, there needs to be an intelligent balance of investment.
B. Champion Trade54
➢Push for creating fair and sustainable free trade agreements with the
world's major growth (Asian powers, the US). At the same time, when
negotiating free trade agreements, e.g., with Asian countries, emphasise civil
rights and freedom and ensure that minimum EU quality standards are met
(e.g., Chinese steel).55
➢Ensure that all European citizens benefit from free trade agreements.
Trade has the potential to enrich society as a whole. However, some benefit
from trade, while others are harmed by it. For this reason, when discussing new
free trade agreements, we should include some mechanisms to distribute their
potential benefits. These redistribution mechanisms, such as progressive
taxation,
have to be taken into account when negotiating trade agreements if
56
appropriate measures are applied.
56 Ibid., Lyon, Redistributing the Gains From Trade Through Progressive Taxation, available at
https://www.nber.org/papers/w24784
55 For more details see EU Reform, Foreign & Neighbourhood Policy Reform, EU relationships with the
United Nations and other multilateral institutions, Relationship with other multilateral institutions
54 For more details see Free, fair, and sustainable trade
31


VIII.
Fiscal policies
A. Taxation challenges and general principles
Volt is aware that this will be one of the fiercest battles for European integration.
Therefore, this long-term process is intended to be implemented gradually, measure
by measure.
Volt believes that common European taxation is necessary as an EU competence.
Moreover, Volt thinks that the forms of taxation in all Member States should be highly
aligned. Discretionary European taxes would ensure direct sources of funding for the
EU and allow a better response to the challenges of globalisation. Moreover, this
would
assure
solidarity
between
EU
members
while
requiring
more
fiscal
sustainability. Finally, it would ensure that non-European companies could not easily
circumvent our national regulations. Our long-term goal is to have a European Union
budget financed through taxes levied by the Union itself, not through member state
contributions. We are proposing to triple the size of the European budget to around a
trillion a year to replace national investment expenditure and provide cyclical
stabilisation.
Volt wants to pursue several objectives in both individual and corporate taxation:
➢Reduce the complexity of tax returns to increase transparency.Identify
loopholes (e.g. within the deductions system).
➢Review the fiscal systems to increase the fairness of tax burdens in society.
➢Rebalance tax burdens.
➢Fight tax evasion in the short term and build a long-term culture against tax
evasion.
➢Use tax incentives to ease entrepreneurship and support the establishment
and growth of new businesses.
B. Concrete proposals about taxation
1. Individual taxation
32


➢Introduce a lower tax on dividends and on interest payments received from
shares bonds issued by SMEs.
➢Lift the tax ceiling by allowing private investors to invest in SMEs and
deducting this investment from the amount invested (e.g. in France, a
household can invest up to EUR 10k and benefit from a tax redemption; this
amount could be raised up to EUR 30k per household).
➢Reduce the number of deductions in favour of lower tax rates and shrink the
number of taxes to promote simplicity.
➢Aim to reduce the overall tax burden on low- and middle-income groups.
➢The European Union needs to raise its own taxes. The European Union shall
be empowered to raise its own resources, not only through member state
contributions, but also through levying its own taxes. Primary candidates for
such European taxes are those connected to common externalities, such as
emission taxes or financial transaction taxes. A European VAT could encompass
these taxes, together with a base of consumption taxation. The proposed
European corporate tax could be shared between the budget of the European
Union and the member states. We aim for the EU to raise taxes to achieve a
budget three times the magnitude of the MFF 2021-2027. This implies that we
propose a yearly EU Budget of approximately 1 Trillion Euro.
2. Corporate taxation
In order to stop tax evasion and generate tax revenues at the European level that
feed a European Budget, Volt proposes to introduce an EU Corporate Tax. The tax
implementation will centre around three critical issues:
➢Introduce an EU-wide definition of how to calculate corporate taxes to
reduce avoidance opportunities. An EU-wide definition of what constitutes
taxable profits or revenues needs to be introduced. Clear accounting rules that
are equal across the Member States will determine how taxable income is
calculated, which is needed in order to allow taxation where revenue and
profits are generated. Companies active in one country and lacking agility due
to limited financial and legal resources should not be subject to unfair
competition with multinationals. Introducing a common corporate tax base at
the EU level should be the first step, although a global deal is an ultimate goal.
In particular, common definitions of what can be accounted for as Research &
Development expenses, Debt and Equity financing, as well as Investments and
Depreciation need to be established. Clear rules to link tax payments to the
33


origin of the income need to be created, as do geographical rules that allow for
the nations to benefit from profits that are made within their jurisdiction.
➢Introduce a baseline corporate tax rate to fight tax havens. Volt supports a
baseline corporate tax rate across the Union and is to be levied by EU
institutions; the Member States will be able to supplement this with a
State-level rate.
➢Implement monitoring practices within large corporations. A full-scale
review of corporate tax systems across EU countries should be implemented to
monitor practices within large corporations, in particular transnational
corporations, that aim at reducing their tax burden through sophisticated legal
structures with no real economic purpose. This effort is complementary to the
OECD's BEPS initiative and aims at monitoring and countering new tax evasion
practices.
➢Register beneficial owners of every company, organisation, and trust.
Tax
57
evasion comes at a dramatic cost for societies and therefore cannot be
tolerated, especially when perpetrated by large and profitable corporations. A
first step in fighting tax evasion is to force offshore/mailbox companies,
organisations, and trusts to register their beneficial owners in a compulsory
and public registry.
➢Make social charges deductible within the first three years of profit.
➢Introduce a progressive tax system according to the size of the business
and relieve the tax pressure on start-ups. However, make sure that the tax
brackets do not hamper growth incentives.
➢Develop methods for EU-wide tax harmonisation, ultimately leading to
European corporate taxes.58
➢Introduce a band for corporate tax rates in the EU to ensure the
competitiveness of Europe as a whole and tax competition between the
Member States.
➢Introduce tax cuts for start-ups in all sectors beyond the current period (e.g.
five years).
58 For more details see Economic Renaissance, Fiscal policies, A European Corporate Tax.
57 For more details see Economic Renaissance, Fiscal policies, A European Corporate Tax.
34


3. General taxation
➢Develop user-friendly digital platforms for all (individuals and businesses) to
calculate and pay their taxes. Additionally, innovative techniques should also be
used to track and investigate tax evasion.
➢Reduce cash payments to limit illegal transactions within the constraints of
respecting citizens’ privacy rights. This could be done on the one hand by
tightening the legal consequences of tax evasion and the effectiveness of the
fight against tax fraud, and on the other hand by making sure that merchants
do not pay excessive commissions for card transactions.
➢Review the effectiveness of sanctions related to tax evasion, both monetary
and non-monetary.
➢Regularly inform the public via EU institutions' websites about the extent of
tax evasion, broken down by sector, and showing the impact on public services.
➢Work with regional administrations and the highest level of the central
government to define regional long-term development plans as well as
short-term measures to stimulate the local economy.
➢Support the introduction of an EU-wide Financial Transaction Tax. Tax
derivative financial transactions at 0.05% and other transactions at 0.021 %.
Exemptions have to be defined, e.g. for SME growth markets.59
C. European corporate tax
The first step towards a European corporate tax would primarily affect larger EU
companies (see below which characteristics would apply) and non-EU companies
conducting business in the EU. We must ensure that non-EU companies generating
revenues in the EU are taxed appropriately on their profits in relation to their
European revenues. Since it is very easy for non-EU companies to transfer their profits
out of the EU and thus pay very low taxes, We must find alternative instruments to
assure a fairer competition scenario in Europe. This would also provide incentives for
the EU Member States to compete on non-tax features to attract businesses.
➢Transfer to the EU the national tax authority of all EU companies generating
revenue exceeding EUR 50 million (each) in more than two EU countries.
59 Legislative Train Schedule, Deeper and fairer internal market with a strengthened industrial
base/taxation, Financial transaction tax, available at
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/legislative-train/theme-deeper-and-fairer-internal-market-with-a-stren
gthened-industrial-base-taxation/file-financial-transaction-tax
35


➢Apply a uniform European minimum tax rate for the above-mentioned
companies, which should be set at 15%,
and then increased depending on the
60
size, type of business and number of employees. Additional features may also
be considered.
➢Transfer to the EU of national tax authority over non-European companies
generating revenue in a European country. Funds obtained from this taxation
would be used to finance the EU budget.
➢Tax  companies based outside the EU on their revenues and not on their
profits if:
○
they present an annual turnover of more than EUR 500 million
and
61
total taxable revenue of EUR 50 million generated in the EU;62
○
their European flat tax rate is below 15%, and
○
other features may be considered.
Non-EU-based companies are companies whose headquarters (HQ) or the parent
company is based outside of the EU.
Companies covered by these new "revenue taxation" rules can apply to be taxed on
their profits. This can happen if:
➢These companies move their HQ to an EU Member State, and in this case,
they would be subject to European taxation as if they were EU businesses; or
➢They prove that the difference between their profit tax rate and their
revenue tax rate is not less than 5% for companies with a turnover of less than
EUR 50 million in revenues and not less than 2.5% for companies with a
turnover of more than 50 million.
If a company falls under the above EU rules but makes losses instead of profits (i.e.
start-up phase, when launching a new product), it can use accounting mechanisms that
permit it to carry forward the loss to future financial years.
Due to the extensive nature and length of the taxation topic, many technical
mechanisms have not been taken into account, but this will happen during the
legislative process.
62 Financial Times, Tech tax deepens EU-US trade rift, available at
https://www.ft.com/content/e9c37b1e-2932-11e8-b27e-cc62a39d57a0
61 Susceptible to change, depending on more data research and indications from the EU Commission
and independent research bodies. Apply to all numbers within this subchapter.
60 Susceptible to change, depending on more data research and indications from the EU Commission
and independent research bodies.
36


D. European Tax Authority (ETA)
If a corporate group operates in three or more European Member States, their taxes
should be collected by a European Tax Authority (ETA). This would meet expectations
of both companies and reduce the burden of data collection on national tax
authorities.
Furthermore, the tax base should not be determined at an entity level but at group
level in order to avoid profit shifting through transfer pricing mechanisms. Volt
therefore supports the proposal for a council directive on a Common Corporate Tax
Base
and on the Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base
.
63
64 65
Volt in general supports the action plan for fair and simple taxation, supporting the
recovery strategy as of 15 July 2020.
However, our main priority is to alleviate
66
burdens from national taxation authorities and assist in the fair recovery of taxes due
by multinational companies.67
By creating a European Tax Authority, Volt wants to limit bureaucracy and streamline
information by expanding the current EUROFISC.
The current proposal by the
68
Commission to share more company data with Member States , will certainly increase
69
the burden on Member States to manage and process the data, while not
guaranteeing fair taxation as the proposal assumes sufficient capacity to manage it.70
Rather, the European Tax Authority should support and cooperate with national tax
authorities to support Member States in combating against tax evasion while ensuring
tax collection.
70 In Denmark, government upon government fires 5000 staff and is left with tax dodging scandals.
Available at
www.berlingske.dk/politik/historien-om-skandalen-skat-9-ministre-5.000-faerre-ansatte-og-danskernes
69 European  Commission, Package for fair and simple taxation, available at
https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/general-information-taxation/eu-tax-policy-strategy/package-f
air-and-simple-taxation_en
68 European Commission, VAT and Administrative Cooperation, available at
https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/business/tax-cooperation-control/administrative-cooperation/v
at-administrative-cooperation_en
67 The Commission has proposed a Single Market Tax in order to raise funds, but at this stage, Volt
believes that assisting national taxation agencies in their collection of taxes owed should be a priority
in reducing tax evasion schemes. Commission says new Single Market tax would target below 0.2% of
turnover, available at
https://www.euractiv.com/section/economy-jobs/news/commission-says-new-single-market-tax-would-
target-below-0-2-of-turnover/
66 COM(2020) 312 final
65 European Commission, Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base (CCCTB), available at
https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/business/company-tax/common-consolidated-corporate-tax-ba
se-ccctb_en
64 COM(2016) 683 final
63 COM(2016) 685 final
37


Elements that the European Tax Authority (ETA) would look into:
○
Audits for companies with high turnover and low profits
○
Liaise with Member States to coordinate relevant information.
○
Serve as a resource for the media to ensure transparency and public
dissemination.
○
Provide administrative support in the management of EU-sanctioned
state aid packages to reduce pressure on Member States and limit the
risk of fraud.
○
The ETA would also seek to cooperate with competent agencies beyond
the EU borders in order to take joined action against tax evasion.
○
The ETA must hold all tax-relevant data in up-to-date digital formats that
are protected against manipulation and unauthorised inspection, but are
still easily retrievable for tax collection purposes. Tax authorities from
Member States can easily get information on tax-relevant transactions
that have taken place outside their jurisdictions, as seen in circular
trades, in order to obtain taxes that were not paid in the first place.
IX.
Mobilise Europe in a smart and sustainable
way
In Europe, air pollution continues to take a heavy toll on health, causing around
400,000 premature deaths annually.
Road mobility also comes at a high price: in
71
2015, slightly over 26,000 people lost their lives in road accidents within the EU,
whereas the total number of road deaths in 2015 is still more than 22 times higher
than the total number of deaths in rail and air transport combined.
Many European
72
cities are polluted, noisy, and face massive congestion problems.73
On the other hand, rural areas face the challenge of lacking transport connections. For
many years now, freedom of movement has been fully recognised and applied
throughout the European Union. However, apart from some security restrictions,
travelling on our continent is still complex. Much remains to be done regarding
pollution, and travellers’ rights are not always optimal.
We follow the UN’s definition of sustainable transport as “the provision of services
and infrastructure for the mobility of people and goods - advancing economic and
73 Business Insider, The 15 European cities with the worst traffic, available at
http://www.businessinsider.de/europe-city-worst-traffic-2017-8?op=1
72 Eurostat, Road safety statistics at regional level, available at
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Road_safety_statistics_at_regional_level
71 UN Environment, The right to breath clean air, available at
https://www.unenvironment.org/news-and-stories/story/right-breathe-clean-air
38


social development for the benefit of present and future generations - in a manner
that is safe, affordable, accessible, efficient, and resilient, while minimising carbon
and other emissions and environmental impacts.”
We envision a smarter and more
74
eco-friendly transportation system, both for people and goods, that is built on
cutting-edge technology while increasing safety and leveraging concepts such as the
sharing economy. Volt wants greener cities with reduced noise and as little pollution
as possible, which will result in a higher quality of life for everyone.
➢Reduce pollution caused by transportation by promoting new ways of
mobility and new modes of transport. These encompass public hybrid buses,75
bike cities like Copenhagen (a policy which led to a 30% reduction in private
cars
by installing “bicycle snakes” and other appropriate infrastructure),
76
77
solar boats/cars/planes, electric vertical take-off and landing jets,
and
78
Hyperloops between big city hubs. Smart infrastructure may include ideas as
diverse as electrified roads
and roads made of solar panels that can directly
79
charge electric vehicles driving on them, and sharing economy concepts. To
enable the implementation of these transport and infrastructure concepts, we
envision collaborations bringing together industry, research, and society in the
development and testing of solutions for next-generation sustainable public
and private transport.80
➢Enable the safe development of autonomous driving. This technology has
the potential to substantially benefit social welfare by reducing road accidents,
lowering vehicle energy consumption and optimising traffic flows. Additionally,
it allows for an optimisation of traffic flow, reduction of logistics costs and can
lead to a revitalisation of rural areas
.
81 82 83
83 cf Valentas Gružauskas, Saulius Baskutis, Valentinas Navickas,
Minimizing the trade-off between sustainability and cost effective performance by using autonomous
vehicles, Journal of Cleaner Production, Volume 184, 2018, Pages 709-717, ISSN 0959-6526,
82 cf Lenz B., Fraedrich E. (2016) New Mobility Concepts and Autonomous Driving: The Potential for
Change. In: Maurer M., Gerdes J., Lenz B., Winner H. (eds) Autonomous Driving. Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-48847-8_9
81 cf Friedrich B. (2016) The Effect of Autonomous Vehicles on Traffic. In: Maurer M., Gerdes J., Lenz B.,
Winner H. (eds) Autonomous Driving. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-48847-8_16
80 Best practise: ElectriCity in Gothenburg, Exciting cooperation for sustainable public transport,
available at https://www.electricitygoteborg.se/en
79 eRoadArlanda, Electrified roads – a sustainable transport solution of the future, available at
https://eroadarlanda.com/
78 The Lilium Jet, The world’s first electric vertical take-⁠off and landing jet, available at
https://lilium.com/
77 The Bicycle Snake, Visit Copenhagen, available at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R_vk4WtvsDE
76 Visitcopenhagen, Copenhagen’s bike culture, available at
https://www.visitcopenhagen.com/copenhagen/sightseeing/copenhagens-bike-culture
75 MAN Bus Germany, MAN Lion's City Hybrid, available at MAN Lion's City | New Drives | MAN DE
74 United Nations, Mobilizing Sustainable Transport for Development, p. 7, available at
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/2375Mobilizing%20Sustainable%20Transp
ort.pdf
39


Volt recognizes the two main challenges of autonomous vehicles (AV)
technology as (1) technical development and (2) creating a stringent political
framework at European level.
○
We are in favour of sandbox experiments, also to promote the
development of necessary technologies such as sensors, algorithms and
cybersecurity technology.
○
We believe that a political framework for AV needs to be developed on
an EU level, including minimum safety regulations and liability rules, as
well as necessary minimum levels of performance (e.g., functional safety
). We are in favour of promoting open source approaches for key
84
software components of AVs (e.g., HD maps, decision algorithms, cyber
security) to prevent the formation of natural monopolies and promote
active competition in the marketplace .
85
➢As a guiding principle, Volt believes that AV technology ought to be permitted
when it is superior to average human drivers .
86
➢Optimal use of existing infrastructure by assessing and mapping productivity
levels in each region to create a European database which is available to all
European citizens. Improve current infrastructure use through technologies
and new pricing schemes.
➢Stimulate local economies by investing in infrastructure development
projects to connect disadvantaged areas to more developed areas. This
includes urban clusters, incentivising high-speed rail projects to connect more
remote areas to the rest of Europe. Many European areas do not have efficient
infrastructures and/or travel costs are prohibitive (e.g., Sicily, two major
airports, an old and inefficient highway, lack of a high-speed railway that the
island needs, expensive flight tickets, etc.). Fairer prices can be achieved
through more competition, but improving infrastructure in remote areas is a
priority. Examples include extending the high-speed rail network to smaller
provincial hubs, improving infrastructure to connect both cities to airports87
and airports to airports, etc.
87 Malpensa Express, extended to Malpensa Terminal 2 since 2017, Corriera della Sera, Sempre più
persone scelgono il treno per arrivare a Malpensa, available at
http://milano.corriere.it/notizie/cronaca/17_ottobre_06/treno-malpensa-express-aeroporto-trenord-fc
6fe5d6-aaa7-11e7-bf9b-eb2db464e457.shtml
86 Anderson et. al, Autonomous Vehicle Technology - A Guide for Policymakers, available at
https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR443-2.html
85 Cf. Ghosh, Rishab Aiyer. "Economic impact of open source software on innovation and the
competitiveness of the Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) sector in the EU." (2007).
84 cf ISO 21448
40


➢Build a more integrated transportation system. Foster multimodal transport
to shift road transport to other modes such as inland waterway transport and
rail. Make rail transport more competitive to road transport by subsidising
investments in trans-shipment hubs by enabling longer freight trains and by
reducing rail access charges.
➢Take advantage of low interest rate markets to launch infrastructure
investments and improve mobility. Volt recommends that Member States
with healthy financial and economic surpluses take advantage of low interest
rates whenever possible to launch extensive infrastructure/reform plans.
➢Assess, if possible, multiplier and welfare effects of public expenditure on
various infrastructure projects to achieve more productive infrastructure, such
as free WiFi and critical connections between airports and cities.
➢Legally require all transport companies receiving any kind of public funding
to submit their financial statements to the public authorities. If transport
companies receive incentives in specific cases (e.g., to finance unprofitable
routes), we cannot allow companies receiving them to distribute their eventual
profits (if they exceed a certain amount) to the shareholders. Furthermore,
public authorities and citizens must always be able to audit the beneficiaries'
financial statements to ensure that there is no fraud.
➢Reshape current infrastructure utilisation with technology and new pricing
schemes to make infrastructure more productive.
➢Climate proof all infrastructure investments to limit economic losses from
the impact of current and future climate change.
41


