

Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
The following document is a constantly evolving work that
outlines the policies proposed by Volt BE.
It respects, and goes hand-in-hand with, the mapping of policies
written by Volt Europa. This is not a political programme.
The following policies have all been approved by members of Volt
Belgium and are thus to be considered official policies.
Future policies or programmes will build on- or be based on this
document.
For any questions or feedback, do not hesitate to send an email to
Volt Belgium’s policy co-leads at policy@voltbelgium.org
Volt Belgium I Page 2 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
Belgium is a country with unparalleled opportunity and potential. It is at the
crossroads of an ambitious political project, the largest single economic
market, and some of the world's most skilled talent. Yet that potential is
strapped by outdated structures and approaches. As Volt we want to shock the
system back to life, ensuring that Belgian institutions and policies become
assertively citizen-centric. As Volt Belgium, we pursue a dynamic shift focusing
on Belgian citizens, placing citizens first and creating genuine dialogue, to
address the real issues of affecting people, and inspire creative solutions
through active participation.
Belgium is de facto the heart of Europe, connecting Member States, and
fostering solidarity through a grand European narrative. Yet today, we find a
conflicted Europe, burdened with outdated structures and approaches, that has
so far tethered the project. We set out to create a systemic shock, at all levels:
the European, National, Regional and Local levels.
The Belgian state should work for its citizens and their ambitions and support
their ability to create a better future. We want to empower citizens, and ensure
that they have all the necessary skills, tools and resources to make the best use
of their potential. Underpinning these citizen-centric efforts is the imperative
need to make the Belgian state structure as a whole more reactive, innovative,
and efficient whilst simultaneously improving the Belgian, European and global
environment.
At a European level, Volt has proposed strengthening the Union on the basis of
5+1 challenges to ensure lasting reforms benefiting citizens. In Belgium, we
also want to put forward 5+1 challenges to achieve the greatest coherence
across governance levels.
Volt Belgium I Page 3 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
Table of Contents:
Pillar 1 - CITIZEN EMPOWERMENT
“Permanent and active citizen participation”
Pillar 2 - SMART STATE
A. General: “A transparent, efficient smart state serving citizens
first”
B. Healthcare: “Good health and a resilient healthcare system for
healthy citizens”
C. Education: “Smart education to unlock a better future for us all”
Pillar 3 - SOCIAL EQUALITY
“Together towards social equality and inclusivity for all”
Pillar 4 - ECONOMIC RENAISSANCE
“An economy loved by entrepreneurs,employees and our planet”
Pillar 5 - GLOBAL BALANCE
A. General: “Towards a more fair, equitable and ecological world”
B. The local level: “Citizen centred urban spaces”
Pillar +1 - STATE REFORM
“A Stronger and Smarter Belgium for all citizens”
Volt Belgium I Page 4 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
Pillar 1 - CITIZEN EMPOWERMENT
“Permanent and active citizen participation”
Today, politicians go from one mandate to the next, often
lacking long term vision, which has led to increased tensions
and alienation between citizens and the political institutions.
Democratic participation shouldn’t stop after elections. Volt
believes that the Belgian state and its institutions must
empower
its
citizens
and
ensure
that
its
policies
are
citizen-centric while enabling citizens to make their voices
heard. We are champions of digital citizen platforms using
technology to embed deliberative democracy, shape and
execute public policies whilst combatting the declining trust
in our institutions. We encourage deliberative democracy (e.g.
citizen assemblies) and are open to explore all fora of
democracy that stimulate citizen participation. We encourage
participatory budgeting, especially at the local level.
Belgium is particularly lacking in levels of citizen participation compared to other
established democracies. Marked as a “flawed democracy” and occupying only the 31st
place globally and the fifth to last place in Western Europe, Belgian democracy is not in an
excellent condition. Indeed, trust in government is low (only 39%)1.
We want to rebuild that trust by creating the channels for citizens to
engage with their public administration and their representatives not
only to hold them accountable, but also to rebuild their trust in political
and administrative institutions.
In Volt, we believe in the culture of participation. Participation increases citizens’ trust in
politics and bridges the gap between citizens and politics. Promoting a more active
involvement of all citizens is a key element of the society we want to build, where nobody
is left behind and where all parties are truly represented and able to make their voices
heard. In line with this key strategic priority, we will empower citizens to be able to
communicate and cooperate with their administrations for the common good and to play
an active role in the policy making process.
To ensure maximum impact on public interest decisions, we want citizen participation to
be institutionalised and to enter politics with a strong legislative support that is built on
1 Eurobarometer Spring 2018 fact sheet Belgium
Volt Belgium I Page 5 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
real citizens’ needs. In doing this, we will take advantage of the most innovative tools and
technologies to promote inclusiveness to generate innovative ideas.
Volt’s threefold approach for citizen empowerment will be based on:
●
Institutionalising participation – To enable citizens participation, appropriate
legal and regulatory frameworks should be put in place. These should be designed
according to the different federal, regional and local competences to ensure that
the right participatory mechanisms are at work. We want these frameworks to be
established at the local and regional level and to provide the right instruments and
channels of communication to reinforce the collaboration between administrations
and citizens. These would include the setting up of public debates, where citizens
can express their opinion on sensitive topics, or through building up local
initiatives. To do so, we will build on the lessons learned by similar initiatives, such
as the Ostbelgien Model or the Participation law of the Italian region Tuscany. We
propose that the regulatory framework could provide compulsory instruments of
participation based on the best practices of the “citizens assemblies” or the “debat
public”, in well defined cases.
●
Digital citizen platforms – We want citizens to be able to communicate with their
governments, at all levels, in an effective and transparent way. Digital platforms
are an effective solution to encourage communication with administrations and
direct citizens' involvement, especially when decisions have a tangible impact on
citizens’ lives, such as in city planning. Volt wants to create an extensive online
suggestion platform where citizens can clearly launch their proposals and
questions, both at federal and regional level. In this way, citizens will be able to
actively contribute to government decisions.
●
Establish participatory budgets at a communal level – Another instrument to
encourage citizens’ participation in the policy making process is to offer them the
possibility to have a say on how communal taxes are spent. Participatory budgets
would allow citizens to allocate small amounts of their tax contributions to projects
of public interest that they support based on transparent and democratically
expressed preferences2.
●
Volt wants to reinforce citizenship education – While citizen education has
started to be implemented across Belgium, we need to further strengthen citizens
by shaping them into critical persons already at school. This should include critical
thinking,
knowledge
about
political
processes
and
institutions
and
about
fundamental values of our society such as human rights, tolerance, democracy and
peace. As a result of the growing digitisation of our world and the impact digital
platforms have on our understanding and knowledge, we need to strengthen
media and digital literacy to allow citizens to distinguish between what is
trustworthy and what is fake. Citizenship education should also be provided in a
framework of lifelong learning and should thus be a component at all teaching
levels.
2 http://www.regione.toscana.it/-/legge-sulla-partecipazione
Volt Belgium I Page 6 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
Pillar 2 - Smart State
A. General: “A transparent, efficient smart state
serving citizens first”
We cannot afford to have a digital society supported by an
analogue public administration. Achieving solutions to the
challenges we face requires a more digitally enabled Smart
State.
By investing in digital infrastructures that facilitate
innovation, speed up integration and interoperability of smart
state tools across the EU, we seek to further enable public
services that empower people, are tailored to their needs and
expectations, and protect us all. Those infrastructures are
developed
in
a
secure
way
(respecting
Confidentiality,
Integrity, Availability). By improving the roll-out of digital
approaches, we seek to improve the effectiveness of our
services,
transparency
around
decision-making
and
implementation, and direct participation of citizens in shaping
the services that they use. We are champions of effective,
proactive and responsive authorities that focus on their
citizens rather than navigating red tape.
At the core of our vision is the ambition to build a smart state in Belgium and promote a
more accountable and transparent European Union. Belgian and European citizens should
have access to better quality public goods and services. Currently, Belgian authorities are
unable to effectively deliver  due to a complex bureaucracy and outdated administrative
procedures. This has resulted in an inefficient and non-transparent administration that no
longer corresponds to the needs or expectations of citizens. It is necessary to continue the
ongoing efforts to improve efficiency of government services by adapting to the digital
age.
Administrative responsibilities often remain unclear to citizens. They are not sure who to
engage with and when they do, more often than not, the response is that this particular
public service is not responsible for their request. This needs to change, if we want citizens
to believe in our institutions again.
We want to build government authorities that are more efficient and
easier for citizens to engage with and thereby make the administrations’
work relevant for Belgian citizens. Volt will introduce e-government
systems
at
all
levels
in
Belgium,
reforming
Belgian
government
institutions, promoting investment in public services and establishing
citizen assemblies to take part and discuss political decisions. In addition
we want to improve the evaluation systems of public institutions such
that public officials are evaluated based on their performance.
Volt Belgium I Page 7 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
Concretely, our goals are:
●
E-Governance – By learning from other European nations like Estonia, Sweden and
Denmark, we aim to build a system that allows for direct interaction with public
officials as well as modernising the operation within public administration. We aim
for one single portal for all levels (municipality, province, region, community and
national), where the system itself would take care of the correct routing. Of course
this will be supported by training government employees in the effective use of
these new technologies so as to ensure maximum benefit for citizens.
●
Smart Glass State – To further empower citizens and make public administration
and Parliament transparent, we want to make government expenses more
transparent and more accessible for citizens. It is not only about more information,
but rather about better information. More concretely, we want to make the
expenses of public administration and investments that are taking place on behalf
of citizens traceable and provide an overview of how they are being used.
Furthermore, Volt will set up an online platform to illustrate how MPs voted urging
them to explain why they voted for or against or abstained.
●
Establish a government and parliamentary transparency register for interest
representation – following the example set by the European Commission and the
Irish Parliament, Volt will push to set up a Lobbying Transparency Register for
companies to illustrate who they are, how much they invest in lobbying activities as
well as which associations they are a member of. We will make it mandatory for
interest representatives to register and to declare with whom they have met from
the level of Head of Unit upwards.
●
State Reform – In order to improve the state’s efficiency, we suggest merging the
communities and the regions into four new entities: Flanders, Wallonia, Brussels
and East-Belgium. Brussels and East-Belgium will also be independent on provincial
level. The linguistic commissions in Brussels (Cocof, Cocom and Vcom) would be
merged into a regional ministry of linguistic and community affairs. A pragmatic
look towards the regional and national responsibilities is also required such as
reducing an outdated state structure like the provinces.
●
Build
better,
more
responsive Ministries – We are facing various new,
cross-sectoral challenges in an increasingly complex and connected world. Our
response needs to address these through our government structures in order to
best tackle cross-sectoral issues in a comprehensive way forward. Subjects such as
foreign trade, environment, climate, health and education would immensely
benefit from a more concerted approach and more federal coordination. Polluted
air or water will not stop at regional or national borders. All Belgians should have
access to the same quality of healthcare and education. To ensure this, it is only
possible if the competences are federal.
●
Build modern, relevant Ministries –  Global issues such as climate change and
digitisation need to be allocated across all aspects of government including local,
regional and federal. As is the case already in many Member States a digital and
environmental communication channel needs to be established as a first step to
better coordinate. Important local and regional concerns such as culture and
heritage-related matters may benefit from staying regionalised.
●
Talent and Reputation – There is a clear need to improve the way that public
administration is evaluated and that it is held responsible for its actions and the
Volt Belgium I Page 8 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
way it is operating. While we are not calling for a privatisation of the public sector,
there should be ways and means to evaluate the performance of employees while
also setting out clear performance objectives and incentives to grow.
●
Discrimination against women - Gender equality is a fundamental human right
that must be implemented in our society. In the current state of our societies,
women are still being treated unfairly, face more barriers than their male
counterparts, fall victim to specific forms of violence and are discriminated
against in their private, public and professional lives. An example of this is the
fact that women are severely discriminated against in the workplace: they often
have lower salaries, are underrepresented in manager positions and have to deal
with harassment and intimidation in the workplace. Volt will push for changing
this and put men, women and everyone else on equal footing.
●
No discrimination based on ethnicity, origin, skin color or sexual preference -
Current legal instruments at national, European and international level do not
offer enough protection to persons dealing with prejudice, unequal treatment
and social exclusion. Minorities continue to face discriminatory treatment,
including
in
the
areas
of
education,
employment,
social
services,
law
enforcement interaction, etc. Discrimination based on ethnicity and colour
remains one of the most dominant forms of inequality, and minorities remain the
most
disadvantaged
and
persecuted
persons
in
society.
In
addition,
discrimination against travellers throughout Europe is particularly problematic.
The following measures can be used:
o
Promotion and review of legislation addressing persistent discrimination
against certain groups. We need to review relevant pieces of national and
European legislation to amend it so that it is adequate for the 21st
century.
o
Strengthening the law enforcement system to end police violence,
harassment, and discriminatory profiling.
o
Similarly, along with other minorities −including women and the LGBTIQ+
community,  individuals are often discriminated against in courts owing to
biassed practices within the justice system. As part of this fight, we urge
to ban treatments where therapists try to cure homosexual behaviour. No
scientific research is known to show that these methods are capable of
changing sexual orientation. There is also no empirical or scientific
evidence that homosexuality or bisexuality is a disorder. Apart from the
fact that this is not scientifically substantiated, this is also in conflict with
the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
Volt Belgium I Page 9 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
B. Healthcare: “Good health and a resilient
healthcare system for healthy citizens”
Government decisions should be based on scientific and
data-driven
approaches.
We
are
proponents
of
smart
healthcare and the utilisation of data-driven approaches,
innovation,
smart
devices
and
scientific knowledge. We
prioritise the reduction of avoidable social, environmental
and lifestyle related burdens on our health. The economic
losses resulting from pollution-related (air pollution, road
traffic, industry, wood burning, etc.)
and lifestyle-related
(smoking, obesity, unhealthy food, etc.) health burdens in
Belgium are gigantic. Around 15% and 40% of the disease
burden (disease, hospitalisations and deaths) is explained by
environmental (involuntary exposure!) and lifestyle-related
factors. A strong contributor to health inequalities being
poverty
and
limited
access
to
education.
Those health
inequalities
should
be
mitigated
by
improving
living
conditions.
B1. National Obesity Plan
Obesity is one of the most significant health risks in Belgium and Europe and is growing at
an astonishing speed. Obesity (BMI >30) increased from around a 10% prevalence in 1997
to a 16% prevalence in 2018 (5) while overweight (BMI 25-30) rose from around 40% in
1997 to 49% in 2018 (5). Obesity negatively affects our health through various
mechanisms and causes elevated disease burdens in terms of cardiovascular disorders,
musculoskeletal disorders and diabetes (6).
Our national obesity plan aims to reduce the disease burden from obesity in Belgium by:
●
Mobility policies focused on active and multimodal transport: mobility policies
that are car-oriented often result in higher rates of obesity (7,8), while policies
focussed on walking, cycling and multimodal transport (e.g. bike + train) tend to
lower obesity rates in the population. Mobility policies can contribute to health
gains by reducing obesity prevalence. In this regard, the government should also
fund a bike voucher for all citizens: each citizen over 12 years old should receive,
once every 3 years, a cheque of €75 that they can use to either give their existing
bike an upgrade or to buy a new bike. The enormous health gains (figure 1)
resulting from increased cycling justify this subsidy.
Volt Belgium I Page 10 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
●
Food labels: improving the current work with food labels, such as the Nutri-Score.
●
Nudging food choices through varying tax levels: the VAT (%) would increase
from 6% to 12% or 21% for food that is either very unhealthy or has considerable
negative impacts on the climate, such as beef, high-sugar drinks, drinks with a high
percentage of alcohol, fast food and fried food in general.
As a compensation for the increased VAT on selected products, the VAT on other
food products would be reduced from 6% to 0%. This would be the case for fruits,
vegetables and chicken to encourage consumption of varied, tasty and nutritious
meals at low prices, with a tax rate of 0%.
The CO2 equivalent emissions and Kcal per 100 g of food intake (as a proxy for
weight gain, with specific criteria such as sugar and fat content specifically
considered) can be used as criteria to determine if a food falls in the 0%, 6%, 12%
or 21% VAT category.
●
Obligation to mention allergens on all foods, including restaurant menus: food
allergies are very prevalent in the population (around 5% of all people have at least
one food allergy) and can be severe. Common allergens are nuts, peanuts, milk,
shellfish and so on. These allergens should be mentioned on restaurant menus. This
considerably increases comfort for allergic people and enables them to make
healthy food choices, as they otherwise may be hesitant to try new, healthier or
eco-friendly options such as vegan food, which may contain potential allergens. For
example, nuts and peanuts, to which a considerable number of people are severely
allergic, are often one of the core elements of a vegan diet. Food should be open
and inclusive to everyone and, therefore, it is essential to transparently name
allergens for all foods.
●
Government supported application to reduce obesity: the government should
either develop or otherwise enable and support private actors to develop an
Volt Belgium I Page 11 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
application that is free to use for all citizens through which people can easily
calculate the health impact and the ecological impact of their food choices.
B2. Reduce the burden of hospitalisations and deaths from
environmental pollution
Environmental pollution has a considerable impact on well-being and health with 13% of
deaths in Europe attributable to environmental factors and environmental pollution (EEA
report No 21/2019). Belgium is around the European average, with 13% of deaths in
Belgium attributable to environmental factors and environmental pollution (EEA report
No 21/2019). Evidence-based policies targeting the reduction of environmental stressors
can considerably reduce sickness, hospitalisations and deaths (e.g. 5–10% of myocardial
infarctions are caused by air pollution, >10% of type 2 diabetes cases are estimated to be
caused by exposure to air-pollution and 20% of asthma cases are caused by traffic-related
air pollution). This includes air pollution, water pollution, noise pollution and exposure to
chemicals but also other environmental stresses such as a lack of availability of green
space for city residents, the lack of safe cycling infrastructure and living close to a busy
road with lots of traffic.
We propose a combative plan to reduce the health impacts of involuntary environmental
pollution with:
○
A primary focus on traffic-related air pollution (PM 2.5, NO2, black carbon,
ultrafine particles, benzene, etc.), industry (PM 2.5) and residential warming
by wood stoves (PM 2.5).
■
Mobility is the most important sector causing a health burden
within
the
broader
environmental
health
burden.
Specific
measures can include considerable additional investment in railways:
more railway tracks, more trains, increased frequency and capacity
of existing trains (including longer service hours), overall improving
rail transport possibilities in urban, suburban and rural areas,
including
support
for
expansion
of
international
rail
travel,
considerable increase cycling infrastructure investments, promote
bicycle-sharing
programs
and
car-sharing
programs,
ban
advertisement on cars (similar to smoking) phase-out fossil fuel cars
and Use improved mobility policy as a tool for improved urban
planning
and space allocation focussing on more green and
recreational areas for people.
Those measures are elaborated upon in the mobility section of our
policies.
■
Residential warming: as for traffic, we want a low-emission zone
for wood stoves across Belgium, with the phasing out of open
wood stoves and other forms of the most polluting wood stoves that
cause particulate pollution contributing to health burdens. There are
Volt Belgium I Page 12 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
few guidelines available. The EPA 2020 Guidelines oblige all wood
burning products to emit <2.5 g/hr of particulate matter. We would
forbid all wood stoves with higher particulate matter emissions, as
this would result in consistent and sustainable health benefits for all
people. In contrast to traffic-related pollution, which has a major
local component, a significant fraction of coarse particulate matter
spreads over hundreds of kilometres and we would urge the EU and
our neighbouring countries to implement similar measures. In
Belgium, wood stoves are the responsibility of the regions, and we
propose to implement the same measures described here in all
regions.
■
Industry: promote sustainable and healthy entrepreneurship. This
will feature amongst other incentives in our corporate tax reform
proposal (for this, see the section economic renaissance).
Those measures can all structurally reduce the pressure on our hospital system and
decrease hospitalisations and death structurally while improving people’s life.
References
(1) Statbel -
https://statbel.fgov.be/nl/over-statbel/wat-doen-we/visualisaties/mortaliteit
(2) Blikvanger algemene ziekenhuizen
https://www.gezondbelgie.be/images/Blikvanger_Gezondheidszorg_2019_pdf.pdf
(3) https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/docserver/3bcb6b04-en.pdf?expires=1636307508&i
d=id&accname=guest&checksum=8140FA8E934BE8B6662C4CD2526E02E0
(4) https://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/healthy-environment-healthy-lives
(5) https://www.healthybelgium.be/en/health-status/determinants-of-health/weight-s
tatus
(6) https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28695973/
(7) https://www.cnu.org/sites/default/files/sadlerb_cnu18.pdf
(8) https://ajph.aphapublications.org/doi/10.2105/AJPH.2009.189324
B.3. An evidence-based smart drugs policy for the 21st century
Volt Belgium proposes a new, pragmatic approach to deal with drugs. We should move
away from receipts of the past that have not worked and strive for a balanced
approach, acknowledging that the war on drugs has failed, recognizing that drugs can
have harmful effects, accepting that individuals can have a certain degree of freedom
in the use of substances as long as this freedom does not hinder fellow people’s
freedom and acknowledging the potential therapeutic effect of some drugs like weed
under certain conditions.
We propose to:
Volt Belgium I Page 13 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
●
Medicinal Cannabis: Fully legalise the use of cannabis for medical needs
Cannabis can have some specific benefits as medical treatment under certain conditions: it
may have analgesic and anti-inflammatory effects, potentially of use in some diseases such
as multiple sclerosis or pain management. Benefits and risks should be assessed and
determined in the same way as for other medicines available on the market and as long as
the risks are acceptable, doctors should have the freedom to prescribe medicines based on
cannabis for medical conditions for which there is evidence in scientific literature that it
may be beneficial for disease evolution. As for other medicines available on the market,
doctors can have the freedom to prescribe the substance off-label in cases where deemed
necessary and appropriate.
●
Legalise and regulate the sales and uses of cannabis for non-medical purposes
We want to regulate the sales of the soft-drug weed/cannabis. Under this regulation,
products based on marihuana (cannabis) can be sold in certain designated stores under
control of the government. The government here guarantees that all the drugs sold in
certified stores should meet the highest quality requirements, and be safe to use for the
end-user. As for tobacco and alcohol, there will be taxes and excise duties levied on those
cannabis-based products. Those products can only be sold and bought in those specific
certified stores. Those cannabis stores that will be allowed in Belgium can be compared
with the current system of selling alcohol in some Scandinavian countries like Norway and
Sweden, where alcohol exceeding a certain percentage can only be bought in specific
alcohol stores. For clarity, we propose to enact this model on the sales of cannabis only,
not on the sales of alcohol and cigarettes who remain available everywhere where they are
available today.
●
Work towards the decriminalization of hard drugs
Portugal's progressive legislation and attitude towards drug addiction has shown that the
current predominant model of a “war on drugs” has not and will not work. Volt intends to
emulate Portugal's model and decriminalise all drug possession under a certain threshold.
This will free up police resources to follow up on large scale drug smuggling and buyer
victimisation. It will enable European and Belgian societies to treat addiction as a medical
and not a criminal problem.
●
Educate people, increased awareness campaigns and addiction programs
At the same time, people should be aware of the numerous detrimental effects of drugs.
Drugs like cannabis or cocaïne do pose some risks on our health, such as increased
cardiovascular risks. With the excise and taxes money raised from the sales of cannabis,
the government will sharply increase awareness campaigns regarding the negative effects
of all kinds of drugs and substances. In addition, there will be specifically more money
dedicated to addiction programs to help people with an addiction to a certain substance to
look for help in an appropriate and fast manner. People with an addiction should be helped
profoundly and as soon as possible, maximally reducing any waiting times and waiting
rows for those addiction programs. .
Volt Belgium I Page 14 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
C.Education: “Smart education to unlock a
better future for us all”
Education is the foundation of a thriving (modern) society. We
want people to be prepared to participate in an evolving European
Union and world. Quality-learning is directly related to the
formation of citizens. We want to empower and engage Belgians
with emotional, financial and digital literacy. This makes them
‘citizens’ in the true meaning of the word, ready for the future. A
key factor for social mobility and thus the reduction of inequalities
is education. That’s why we think it is crucial to invest in. We aim
for sustainable lifelong learning. This requires a healthy
environment for all in both body and mind. Learning should be
joyful and interesting to be able to keep students and staff
motivated, while at the same time excelling in education rankings.
Affordable and accessible education should be a basic right.
Strengthening learning-communities will foster tomorrow’s
leaders, entrepreneurs and workers.
Education is the basis of a working democracy. Having informed citizens able to engage
in fructuous debates and develop a strong form of critical thinking is key to properly
evaluate and elect its representatives at the local, national, and EU level.
C1. EU Education
With more competencies being transferred to the European Union level and as a
Pan-European party, we believe pupils and adults should know how the EU works, its
history and their rights as EU citizens. However, EU education is highly fragmented. and
recent EUrobarometer surveys showed a considerable willingness of Belgian citizens to
learn more about the EU while the surveys also uncovered current knowledge on the EU is
at a low level.
By learning more about the EU, we believe students will develop a critical and
fully-informed understanding of the potential strengths and weaknesses of the EU, have a
better understanding of the political system they live in and be empowered to actively
participate and shape EU-level politics positively.
We Propose to:
●
Integrate EU Education into the national curriculum as a learning goal for schools
and adult education, such as teaching on what the EU entails (nature, history,
development, etc...), what are the values and principles of the EU, what are the
competences of the EU, how does democracy work in the EU, and some positive
Volt Belgium I Page 15 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
and negatives aspects of the current integration process discussing possible
solutions.
●
Integrate EU Citizenship Education into the national curriculum as a learning goal
for schools and adult education by teaching about citizens rights and obligations
under EU law and how citizens can participate in European-level politics.
C2. Curriculum reform
C.2.1. Desinformation, media literacy, fake news and critical
thinking
With democracies around the world threatened by the seemingly unstoppable onslaught
of false information, conspiracy theories and bot, schools should be at the forefront of this
fight by teaching about these issues starting at primary level.
The problem is, anyone can publish almost anything. It's not easy to strike the right
balance between freedom of expression and citizens’ right to accurate information.
Jurisdictions around the world (USA, EU etc.) try to get to grips of the issues by e.g.
regulating social and media platforms more stringently. However, there is only so much
governments can do in terms of regulation and antitrust control that would not infringe on
free speech or other rights of platforms and media companies. Even where this is
achieved, consumers often don’t understand their rights and how they could better
control the nature and quality of information they receive.
Therefore, education is the best and most effective way to fight the spread of
misinformation.
We Propose to:
●
Teach children from a young age about perils of disinformation and fake news
and how to properly analyse media content through critical thinking. Media
literacy and critical thinking should be at the core of what is taught, across all
subjects.
●
Highlight the importance of quality sources when looking for information. Common
evaluation criteria include: purpose and intended audience, authority and
credibility, accuracy and reliability, currency and timeliness, and objectivity or
bias.
●
Explain older children and students how social media algorithms work, what is
being done at EU level and elsewhere in the world and how they can influence
behaviour.
●
Train teachers, civil servants, journalists, and librarians so they can introduce
information literacy programmes in schools and community centres so children and
adults can start thinking about the reliability of the information they encounter.
Volt Belgium I Page 16 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
The goal is to form active, responsible citizens and voters. Thinking critically, fact checking,
interpreting and evaluating all the information they receive, wherever it appears, is crucial.
C 2.2.. Digital literacy
Volt believes that the world's future economic champions will be countries that master the
digital transition and enable their businesses to quickly become digital proponents in a
competitive environment. ICT in education improves engagement and knowledge
retention; when ICT is integrated into lessons, students become more engaged in their
work. This is because technology provides different opportunities to make learning more
fun and enjoyable.
Moreover, given digitalization’s role in the current transformation of advanced economies,
ICT knowledge offers the promise of new business and employment opportunities along
with higher productivity gains for said economies.
Today, basic ICT skills are essential in almost all professional fields and areas of activity
and daily life. ICT specialist workers are in very high demand across a wide range of
economic sectors. The professional field is growing twice as quickly as the economy as a
whole, and there is already an acute and increasing shortfall in specialist staff.
We Propose to:
●
Teach students and adults more than just the basics of ICT (Information and
Communications Technology), so besides being able to operate a computer with an
internet connection and utilize the most common software programs used in
modern professional environments around Belgium and the world (Excel, Outlook,
etc.), they also have some decent understanding and practice of programming, AI
(Artificial Intelligence), Cloud computing, fintechs, and other new technologies.
●
Inform students and adults about common online scams, personal cybersecurity,
and social media literacy, its benefits and dangers (fake news is covered in section
A.3.).
●
Give students the fundamentals on how to create tech startups (also covered in
section B.3.).
●
Make sure that schools and community centers are digitally equipped,
connected, and that classes are taught by knowledgeable teachers. This can be
achieved through public-private partnerships to promote the use of ICT by
encouraging private funding for hardware and software.
C 2.3. Financial literacy
Promoting financial literacy is critical because it equips students and citizens with the
knowledge and skills they need to manage money effectively in different settings
throughout their lives. Without it, financial decisions and the actions ones take—or don’t
take—lack a solid foundation for success to have a more prosperous life.
Volt Belgium I Page 17 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
Financial knowledge has important implications for the behaviour of individuals and the
quality of life but also for societies as a whole. Basic economic awareness is increasingly
necessary for the conscious exercise of economic citizenship since often citizens are
called upon to express an opinion on complex economic reforms.
We Propose to:
●
Have a national strategy to promote financial literacy and its implementation to
ensure that everyone has basic financial knowledge - whether acquired at the
school or community centres - which is useful for making choices that are
appropriate to their economic situation and consistent with their preferences. The
Strategy does not intend to transform individuals into "experts" but to ensure that
individuals have the basic tools necessary to orient themselves in today's complex
economic world and make informed choices.
●
Partner with FSMA (Belgian Financial Services and Markets Authority) to use its
Wikifin program to encourage the introduction of financial education into the
classroom and also its “train the trainer” program to qualify teachers to administer
financial education classes.
C2.4.. Entrepreneurship
Volt believes in empowered savvy citizens so they can be able to make the most of their
talent and potential. To do so, we believe that learning about entrepreneurship is essential
since it is not just about teaching the hard skills such as finance, management, marketing,
and public speaking to create a business; it is about providing students with an
entrepreneurial mentality that can serve them regardless of their career path. This is
real-world learning that can set students up for long-term success both professionally as
well as personally.
Additionally, established companies seek to hire employees with an entrepreneurial
mindset to drive innovation, relevancy, and bring a competitive advantage to them. Not to
mention that small companies and startups play a very important role in job creation.
We Propose to:
●
Teach the basics of entrepreneurship to high school students, including subjects
such as finance, marketing, and starting a business and "selling" it to potential
investors. Beyond this, helping students develop a startup mindset where trying
and failing is acceptable as well as having a proactive, flexible, go-getter positive
attitude in their studies, career, and life.
●
Help students develop innovative and proactive ways of thinking that are effective
on problem-solving as well as problem-prevention, self-management, and
working with people.
●
Have partnerships with the private sector to train current teachers and civil
servants to teach such classes in schools and in community centers throughout
Volt Belgium I Page 18 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
Belgium and implement "startup week" where innovators can pitch their ideas to
potential investors.
C. 2.5. Emotional Intelligence (EQ)
Emotional intelligence (EQ) is the ability to perceive, control, and evaluate emotions. EQ is
essential for the well-functioning of the psychological and physical systems of individuals
which determine the level of personal and professional success. The EU education system
is highly fragmented when it comes to the EQ. For instance, in Belgium, the educational
system lacks a well-defined EQ curriculum and practices which can be applied in all the
regions (i.e., Flanders, Wallonia, & Brussels).
Volt proposes the creation of an effective bridge between EQ theory and mechanisms
through which EQ can be implemented in schools from the early years. Volt has the goal to
build up strategies that are secured, vigilant and resilient for future generations by
creating a balance between the jobs and skills for tomorrow, as well as between the tech
and humanistic spheres. Volt believes that the proposed policy will be effective in creating
a balance between mind-body-soul relations which determines how successful individuals
are in life.
Volt will concretely implement this by integrating EQ into the national curriculum for
Belgian schools from primary and secondary school to high school to university cycles (just
a follow up of the basis of EQ, they should achieve this by this stage).
We aim to achieve this by including following stakeholders in our action plan:
-
Primary & Secondary schools
-
Universities
-
Local & National authorities
-
EQ specialists (i.e., psychologists)
By doing this Volt aims that pupils and students will develop their abilities to understand,
interpret and respond to the internal and external stimuli which trigger various emotions
and feelings. Moreover, Volt wants to use EQ strategies to help students succeed
academically and prevent bullying, while also having a better balance between physical
and mental health. This is essential for ensuring a safe society, and the primary way to
start doing this is by teaching EQ from younger ages and supporting long-term beneficial
development for future generations and Europe as a whole.
C. 2.6. Comprehensive first aid
The teaching of first aid and mental health suicide prevention techniques in schools and
community centers is highly fragmented or not present in most cases. However,
cardiovascular diseases and suicide are some of the main causes of death in Belgium.
Thus, giving the basic training on crisis response to adolescents in school and adults in
community centers can empower them to make a positive difference in the life of family
members, friends, or someone they know.
We Propose to:
Volt Belgium I Page 19 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
●
Train adolescents and adults practical life-saving first aid techniques, such as the
use of an automated external defibrillator (AED), cardiopulmonary resuscitation
(CPR), management of bleeding, and choking treatment, to prepare them to
potentially save lives during a medical emergency.
●
Introduce and train adolescents and adults to QRP so they can recognize the
warning signs of a suicide crisis and how to question, persuade, and refer
someone they know to help.
●
Collaborate with the Red Cross, other non-profits, and hospitals to apply such
training in schools and community centres.
C. 3. Improving the education system for teachers and
students
C. 3.1. Improving the education system for teachers and
students
Education should be a force for fostering social mobility and inclusion – in Belgium this is
currently not the case.
In Flanders 8.000 children leave school annually without qualification. This is almost 12%
of students, with the percentage rising to 22% in Antwerp. In the past 10 years there has
barely been any improvement in these figures, despite the government’s intention to
halve the number of school leavers between 2009 and 2019. Those leaving school come
overwhelmingly from poor families, especially where the parents are low-skilled and/or
have a migration background. The OECD, in their PISA reports, have for years pointed out
that Belgium has one of the highest levels of education inequality of all OECD countries.
By the time they are 15, children from the poorest 25% of families lag 3 years behind their
rich peers from the top 25%. Students that must repeat one or two school years are at
particular risk of dropping out.
As a society we invest €90.000 per child, just for primary and secondary education. Young
people that dropout of school without a qualification are on average unemployed for 60%
of their working life. At a cost of €30.000 per year (in benefits, social housing, subsidies
etc), this adds up to more than 700.000 per person over the next 40 years. The cost of
secondary education is on average €9.300 per student per school year. Reducing the
number of school dropouts will benefit the students, society and businesses who are
having trouble finding qualified staff.
We propose:
1. No school bills for families living in poverty. While bills are capped for
pre-school (€45) and primary education (€90), there is no cap in secondary schools,
where students pay on average €1300 per year for books, projects, materials,
extracurricular activities etc.
Volt Belgium I Page 20 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
2. Free tutoring for children whose families live on a minimum wage or on
benefits . Children who fall behind in learning are at risk of dropping out
completely. With a cost of €9.300 per secondary school pupil per year, it makes
sense to invest in additional tutoring for children that need it. Private paid tutoring
is increasing the already considerable inequality in Belgian education.
3. Collaboration between schools and organizations that work with families in
poverty to identify and fix obstacles to success in school. For example social
housing organizations, OCMW, after-school clubs. Children drop out of school for
various reasons, many of which have to do with their home situation. There are
several organizations involved in helping those in poverty (more than 50 in Antwerp
alone) but not all people in need find the necessary help.
4. Encouraging teachers to apply for jobs in schools in lower income
neighborhoods by offering a bonus. This has been done successfully in
Amsterdam, where teachers receive a bonus + an 8% increase in salary if they
choose a school with a high number of students that need extra help. The Belgium
amount is up to discussion.
Note:
https://www.mo.be/analyse/onderwijs-wist-sociale-verschillen-niet-uit
https://www.parool.nl/amsterdam/15-miljoen-euro-voor-amsterdamse-scholen-om-corona
-achterstand-weg-te-werken~bd9006f41/?referrer=https%3A%2F%2Fduckduckgo.com%2
F
C. 3.2. Improve teachers working conditions
Teachers have increasing workload and competing demands. Too much administrative
paperwork, rapidly changing guidelines, and less freedom to teach. Parents expect
teachers to nurture, be therapists, social workers and so much more. Meanwhile the
average class size is increasing, teacher’s shortages are becoming more alarming, and the
profession of teaching is losing the recognition it rightfully deserves. Volt believes it is
high time to break this cycle.
We Propose to:
●
Trust the teachers: Teachers should teach, deploying their creativity and expertise.
Teachers should be given clear and concise guidelines on the final learning goals,
while enjoying the freedom to reach those goals as they see fit. To ensure teachers
can actually teach, we reduce the administrative burden as a key priority.
●
Support the teachers: There is a shortage of teachers across the country, and
especially in Brussels. Classrooms are growing, reducing teachers’ capacity to
adequately provide each student with the attention they deserve. Volt proposes a
hard cap on maximum class size, adapted to each school type. Moreover, we will
develop the school’s role as an anchor point in its community, tapping into a whole
Volt Belgium I Page 21 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
community of potential volunteers standing ready to help. Finally, we want to make
a career in education possible and exciting for professionals in other sectors, at any
point of their career. Switching to a teacher’s job should be made easier and more
attractive, fully recognizing previous professional experience.
●
Value the teachers: Less young graduates start their careers as teachers, and many
of them do not stick around for lack of opportunity and recognition. Teaching
should be valued and appreciated. To do so, Volt will invest in better training of
teachers. Student-teachers should be able to start teaching part-time while being
compensated. Master’s degrees for elementary school teaching should be
developed and encouraged. Finally, Volt wants to make the teacher’s population
more diverse. The overwhelming majority of teachers in primary and secondary
education are white women. By encouraging a more diverse and balanced teacher
workforce, more aspiring teachers from all backgrounds will identify with the
profession and pursue a career in teaching.
C. 4. More international oriented education - EU/global
citizens
C. 4.1. Intra-community exchange for Belgian teachers and
high-school students
Many Belgians have little to no idea of what their fellow citizens from across the language
border are up to. Besides (some) language classes in school, they encounter very few
opportunities to speak the other Belgian languages in their daily lives. This contributes to a
division of the country, a lack of comprehension, and, ultimately, unnecessary tensions in a
country that is already too small to be divided.
The EU’s Erasmus system provides university students with fantastic opportunities to grow
as a person, make friendships, develop language skills and expand their horizons. On a
greater scale, it reinforces European unity and cohesion. In much the same vein, Belgian
students
and
teachers
would
greatly
benefit
from
educational
exchanges
between
communities. It is one way to strengthen links between the North and the South, with
positive impacts for the individuals involved and society at large.
We Propose to:
●
Set up a Belgian ‘Erasmus’ system for high school students aged between 16 and
18. During the fifth or sixth year of high school, students would go to a school of the
other major language community for a duration of at least four weeks. More than just
switching schools, students would be encouraged to attend local activities outside of
school hours. Students of the German-speaking community would also be included.
Volt Belgium I Page 22 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
●
Encourage a similar exchange scheme for teachers, albeit for a longer duration.
Teachers would go to teach in a school of another community for a few months, and
experience what teaching is like ‘on the other side’.
●
Encourage this system through ‘school pairings’, where a school in one community
would be paired to a school in another. This would ease the administrative and
infrastructural burden of the scheme.
C. 5. Excelling in education
C. 5.1. Centralized exam to measure school performance
Increasing standards in Belgian education
Belgium used to rank at the top for excellence in math, science, and reading. The
benchmark is the OECD Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) that is
carried out every three years. In reading, mathematics and science Belgium used to lead
the European rankings, but has now dropped out of the top 10. The difference between
the highest and lowest performing pupils has also increased and is among the highest in
the OECD. Flanders scores better than Wallonie, but as a whole standards are falling and
inequality is increasing.
It is not a question of spending. Belgium spends more than almost any other OECD
country on education, as a percentage of GDP. We spend twice as much per student as
Estonia, a country that is second on the PISA ranking after Singapore.
In nearly all other OECD countries there is some type of standard central exam for
secondary school students. In Belgium there are ‘eindtermen’ – standards that must be
met, but exams and grading are done exclusively by the schools. This makes it difficult for
students that want to apply to foreign universities, as there is no benchmark to assess
them and grades from different schools cannot easily be compared.
We propose standard tests for secondary schools:
a.
The fractured nature of education in Belgium makes it hard to
compare schools and student performance. A standard exam for at least
mathematics and language would force schools to maintain a minimum
standard in these subjects, while still leaving enough room for a teacher’s
personal input and student’s interests in other subjects.
b.
A standard exam would help clever disadvantaged students. A
diploma from some inner-city schools is now considered to be worth less
than a diploma from an ‘elite’ school.
c.
‘Teach to test’ can be a positive outcome if the exams test essential
skills and knowledge.
Volt Belgium I Page 23 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
d.
Use the "Centrale Examencommissie" to administer the exams
throughout Belgium to avoid extra burden to teachers and schools.
e.
The exams could start by being applied at the end of primary and
secondary school and then extend to every single school year as necessary.
Concerns; tutoring for high grades on the tests may lead to more inequality.
https://www.tijd.be/politiek-economie/belgie/vlaanderen/vanaf-de-jaren-90-begon-het-al-
fout-te-lopen-in-ons-onderwijs/10311279.html
https://www.vrt.be/vrtnws/nl/2017/08/31/_ons-onderwijs-heeft-nood-aan-centrale-exame
ns/
https://www.voka.be/nieuws/onderwijs-groot-budget-dalende-kwaliteit
Volt Belgium I Page 24 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
Pillar 3 - SOCIAL EQUALITY
“Together towards social inclusivity for all”
We are the party of systemic inclusion. We aim for a society
where
no-one is left behind and where socio-economic
inequalities
are
reduced. For us, politics should enable
everyone to have a decent quality of life. We are defenders of
human rights and do not tolerate any discrimination based on
gender, race/origin and sexual orientation. We want to expand
those rights and don’t tolerate any rollback of those acquired
universal rights. We seek to advocate and advance social
policy
and
achieve
this
by
genuinely
listening
to
and
empowering those who are disadvantaged by recognizing
injustice better, connecting better with disadvantaged groups
and developing solutions to empower the disadvantaged to be
their own agents of change.
Volt Belgium I Page 25 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
Pillar 4 - ECONOMIC RENAISSANCE
A.“An economy loved by entrepreneurs,
employees and our planet”
The economic champions of the world will be the countries that
master the digital and ecological transition. Companies and their
employees are important stakeholders in achieving those goals
and a better future. We will foster an entrepreneurial culture that
celebrates entrepreneurship. We want Belgium to enable its
businesses to quickly become digital frontrunners, and to embrace
the ecological transition. We will promote entrepreneurship and
innovation through investment whilst cutting the red tape that
has prevented these businesses from emerging in Belgium. We
support substantial investment in the improvement of digital,
green and hard infrastructure to enable inclusive and sustainable
economic growth that works for all people. Citizens are the
beating heart of our economy. We want a sustainable, resilient
economy. Therefore, we propose the development of an industrial
policy at the European Union (EU) level that is prepared to deal
with unexpected situations from financial crises to pandemics. We
support the EU building a diversified economy with strategic
autonomy while still being embedded in the global economy. As
Volt, we stand for a level playing field in Europe’s internal
competition. We strongly oppose tax evasion and will close
loopholes in the regulations to sharply curtail the extreme tax
avoidance by corporations and individuals through European
harmonisation of fiscal policy and effective multilateralism.
We want to overhaul the Belgian economy, make it more inclusive and build stronger links
between Wallonia and Flanders. The Belgian economy is marked by several structural
features, which requires reform, and has recently suffered from lower than expected
growth, a drop in unit labour productivity and low levels of investments. However, such
reforms will only be successful within a strong European economy and a fully integrated
Single Market. This needs to be addressed and to do so we will:
●
Build the right environment to grow truly Belgian, European and global champions
Volt Belgium I Page 26 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
●
Bring Belgian employment law into the 21st century by taking into account the new
ways of working as well as the new realities of mother- and fatherhood
●
Invest into technology infrastructures to provide the business environment with
high speed internet
●
Implement distributed ledger technology where most impactful
●
Update schooling as well as university curriculums to ensure future Belgians are
better adapted to today’s economy
●
Strengthen entrepreneurship education and support innovators
●
Get rid of rules that hamper innovation and entrepreneurial ambitions
●
Implement digital education throughout our education system
●
Establish an environment, where all citizens living in Belgium benefit from the
investments in future technologies including economic migrants, refugees, older
and younger generations and regions where economic growth has been blocked
due to a lack of investment
●
Implement rules for a sustainable financial sector that supports the growth of an
inclusive and green/circular Belgian economy and
●
Speed up efforts to promote sustainable economic growth while targeting the
long-term ambitions of our society
We believe that these ambitions will support Belgian companies to be global champions
with the competitive edge of being sustainable and best responding to customer, worker
and investor needs. Concretely our goals are:
●
Volt wants a strong and inclusive Belgian economy – pursuing equality
throughout the entirety of society, and seek a cultural revolution against
conventional sex and gender norms; attitudes that are often enhanced from
infancy. Volt seeks to plug the gaps in social and biological education taught at
schools, to promote a more understanding, accepting, and inclusive society, to
break the cycle.
●
Parent equality in private and professional life – Belgium is still relatively
traditional in the way it is treating new parents. Mothers get up to 3-4 months,
while fathers get no more than 10 days. Leaving the decision to the couple of how
they want to organize parental leave would make allow families to decide for
themselves rather than having the state tell Belgian families what to do. We
therefore propose to allow equal paid maternity and paternity leave for a longer
period up to 12 months and introduce family working time after parental leave to
allow both parents to return to part-time work, with possible compensation for
lower income during specific life stages (e.g. during early childhood, as provided for
in the German Parental Leave Act).
●
Adapt the Belgian employment law for the 21st century – greater emphasis
needs to be put on the new challenges that the new economy is posing. It is no
longer 9 to 5, instead there are new ways of working and being more flexible in
your own work as long as you deliver. While rules for work flexibility exist, we want
to help change the culture of work more and allow Belgian employees to take full
advantage of their flexibility. Volt will reduce the costs of employing people in
Belgium and refocus skills training towards the sectors that need them the most
whilst ensuring that we are fully integrating new talented arrivals.  
Volt Belgium I Page 27 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
●
Invest in digital infrastructure – to equip Belgium with a 21st century workforce,
Volt will push for expanding high-speed internet across the country into rural and
urban areas. Faster and greater access to internet is a proven factor in increasing
economic growth, fostering innovation and connecting business and people
economically.
●
Support technologies that are shaping the future of work – Volt will support
innovative companies across all of Belgium. Given the tremendous impact artificial
intelligence and distributed ledger technology (DLT) will have on the future of our
societies and economies, Volt will use dedicated EU funding schemes, amongst
others, to support innovation in established companies as well as in young start-ups
to develop ethical artificial intelligence and smart DLT.  
●
Teach digital – Volt will ensure that digital education is a core to the curriculum
throughout our education system. In conjunction with the investments in digital
infrastructure and innovation, Volt will set out to equip future Belgian generations
with the skills and tools needed to succeed when AI and DLT will revolutionise the
way we work. Current, and future generations need to be equipped with new skills
that are not replaceable by AI or machines. Innovations have always resulted in new
opportunities, Volt will make sure that Belgian citizens are able to benefit the most
from these are are not left behind.
●
Strengthen the economic cooperation between Belgian regions – To promote a
strong Belgian society and economy, it is essential to overcome the language
barriers between citizens. We believe that language lessons in Dutch, German,
French and English should start at an earlier age to help bridge cultural gaps and
provide for more exchanges between regions and also foster more inclusiveness.
●
Work towards greater inclusion of migrants and refugees, who can become, if
welcomed adequately and in a structured way, a core part of our society and
economy.
Providing
language
and
vocational
training,
apprenticeships and
traineeships for incoming refugees, as well as fostering an active dialogue between
communities, would help improve economic, cultural and social integration.  
●
Tackle social exclusion, regenerate communities, and put in place an ambitious
programme of public and private investment in economically disadvantaged
areas – this is most needed in less economically strong areas such as parts of
Brussels (Anderlecht, Molenbeek, Schaarbeek, St. Josse) and in post-industrial area
of Wallonia.
●
Educate – One of the most important aims of education is to transform young
people into
citizens. Volt stands for a revival of democracy, and for this, targeted education is
essential. Philosophical attainment targets are indispensable for the following
reasons:
a.
Especially the art of arguing and piercing through false reasonings must be
given a clear place in the general formation of future generations. Especially in
a time of 'fake news' and more citizen participation in policy making is of great
importance.
b.
Studies also indicate that philosophising has a positive impact on both the
intellectual and emotional capacities of students.
Volt Belgium I Page 28 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
c.
Western philosophy is a part of our cultural heritage that must not be lost. In
addition, insight into philosophies originating on other continents can promote
insight into other cultures and tolerance.
1. Tax reform: Labour Tax
To face the challenges of the future, and put citizens central in society and the economy,
we want a tax shift from taxes on labor to taxes on pollution, health burdens and
extreme wealth. Lowering the taxes on labor enables citizens to strive and proceed in a
future society.
It provides maximum freedom to people to spend money on what they
prefer, however in the other tax domains they are nudged to spend money in ways not
harmful for our planet or fellow citizens’ health.
We are achieving this by increasing the tax-free-minimum, the amount of income on
which no taxes at all should be paid. Currently, this amount is € 9050 on an annual basis,
we propose to considerably increase this amount to at least € 12.000, which would
correspond to a tax-free monthly income of € 1000.
This tax cut would be financed
through the introduction of a capital gain tax and an increase of taxes on pollution and
health burdens. Increasing the tax-free minimum income ensures that in absolute terms all
wages increase, and in relative terms the lower and middle-income wages have the highest
percentage increase.
Further, currently the tax free minimum is increased in the case of having children. And it
is relatively more increased if you have more than one child (your 2nd child delivers you a
larger increase in tax-free income than your 1st child and so on…). We want to harmonize
this system, and give the same increase in tax-free income for each child equally. Currently,
the additional tax free amount is € 1650 for the first child, € 2590for the 2nd child, € 5260
for the third child, … . We propose to harmonize this system and give an increase in
tax-free income of around € 2500 for each child or slightly higher. The purpose of this
latter change is having a budget-neutral operation, keeping child subsidies at a constant
level.
2. Tax reform: Corporate Tax
A taxation system that rewards value added to the society and the environment
The importance of maintaining a fair society and protecting the environment is growing as
the world faces immense challenges linked to human activity and economic development.
Current corporate tax rates tend to indiscriminately apply to profit without factoring in
corporations’ contribution to the society and the environment before generating their
profits. Volt believes in a smart taxation system that rewards corporations based on their
total contribution.
Volt Belgium I Page 29 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
The current CIT in Belgium is 25% with only an exception made for SMEs which attract
a lower tax rate of 20%. Volt proposes using sliding scales between 15% and 35%
based on contribution to: employment, protection of the environment, health and
education and profit margins. Each economic sector and industry will have their own
specificities and therefore their own sliding scale reflecting the characteristics of their
sector. A dedicated governmental office would be set up to define standard metrics, if
possible internationally recognised, and calibrate them per economic sector. Adapted
metrics per sector would maintain a level playing across the economy avoiding thereby
favouring one key sector against another .
Creation of employment: corporations that employ a larger number of people or
generate employment in economically disadvantaged regions will see a reduction in their
tax rate commensurate with the average ratio between payroll and turnover times the
number of employees. The objective of this metric is to reward a high remuneration of
labour both in terms of salaries but also number of employees.per unit of revenue.
Contribution to education and new technologies: corporations that invest in education
and new technologies, for instance through their research and development programmes,
will see a reduction in their tax rate commensurate with the ratio between their
investment and their turnover. This could be typically achieved in partnership with schools
and universities. The objective would be to measure the contribution per unit of revenue.
Protection of the environment: corporations can improve the environment by reducing
the environmental impact of their economic activity and by contributing to initiatives
aiming at protecting the environment. A reduction in tax rate will be granted for
companies that minimise their level of pollution, employ service providers meeting high
ESG standards and require their shareholders to meet high ESG standards. The ratio
between shareholder equity and turnover multiplied by an ESG grade will give a metric of
the level of quality investment per unit of revenue.Furthermore investments aiming at
improving the environmental impact will be taxt deductible.
Volt wants to promote sustainable entrepreneurship.
For new companies turning a profit for the first time, Volt proposes to apply the lowest
corporate income tax rates of 15% for two years. For such new companies also achieving
the highest contribution rates in the sliding scale no income tax will be due for the first
four years of positive profit if the return on equity remains below 5%.
Volt Belgium I Page 30 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
3. Tax reform: Property Tax
According to experts, property taxes are the most efficient kinds of taxes. They distort
behavior less for first-time homeowners, and are more growth friendly than taxes on
income, employment, or even consumption. Additionally, they are one of the easiest taxes
to be collected since they give little room for tax evasion and extreme tax avoidance
schemes if the real estate values are well-assessed.
At the same time, there has been considerable price increases in the housing market of
developed countries, both for ownership as for rental. This increase has been significantly
larger than average salary growth, keeping middle-class families struggling to pay one of
the most essential living costs after food.
Among many reasons for this housing price growth is price speculation and ownership
concentration by big financial and property market companies. This ownership
concentration makes renting houses overpriced and artificially drives up the price in the
housing market.
We propose to:
●
Incentivize the reduction of some of the regional and municipal property
taxes for first-time home owners to foster popular home ownership.
●
Compensate this revenue reduction with an increase in property taxes for
third homes (and subsequent ones) to disincentivize home ownership
concentration and speculation that increases housing and rent prices for the
average citizen.
●
Increase in property taxes for overseas entities that/who do not have
residency in Belgium to avoid the formation of real estate asset bubbles
due to high liquidity in foreign financial markets.
●
Stimulate Smart Living through the property tax. The reformed property
tax should incentivize reduced concretisation of earth’s surface and allow
future houses to be built in a way good for the planet. Not everyone has to
live in an apartment but we explore ways to stimulate pleasant and efficient
living (e.g. shared gardens, co-housing, …)
4. Tax reform: Capital gain tax
Together with climate change, rising inequality will arguably be the major challenge to our
societies in the coming decades. The nefarious effects of high inequality have been
pointed out by many researchers. In Volt we consider excessive inequality to be
undesirable, even though total equality is not something that Volt pursues.
Volt Belgium I Page 31 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
One of the major drivers of accelerating inequality is the divergence in the rate of growth
of income earned through work versus income generated by rents acquired through the
ownership of capital. If we want to tackle inequality, we will have to find a better balance
between the two. The government’s strongest tool to intervene is taxation.
Therefore, we as Volt strive to implement a capital gains tax for individuals, which
currently does not exist in Belgium. A capital gain is the appreciation in value of an asset
between the moment an asset is obtained and the sale of that asset. Volt’s aim is not
necessarily to increase the government’s budget, but to ensure fairness in the burden of
taxation. Trying to escape the capital gains tax must be considered as defrauding the
government similar to the reasoning behind undeclared labour. It is up to the government
to close the legal backdoors through which taxation can be escaped.
We may well face a future of slow to non-existent growth, and need economic/fiscal
policies adapted to that. In the old system, for inequality to be reduced we needed
economic growth – assuming that wages rise at a similar pace to the economy – higher
than the increase of rents from capital investments. An unlikely future prospect, as this is a
historical anomaly of the decades following WWII. Therefore, it is paramount that capital
gains are integrated into the tax base.
Volt’s ultimate goal is to go a step further and to implement a system of personal taxation
that does not discriminate between labour or capital, but combines all sources of income
and progressively taxes these as one. A capital gains tax would be a first step to achieve
this objective.
The main purpose of Volt is to use the income from the capital gain tax to decrease taxes
on labour. This will encourage effort and work. Therefore, possibly spurring innovation,
increasing employment.
Requirements for the tax
●
It should be progressive: essential for fairness; people generally accept taxes when
they feel they’re fair and everybody contributes.
●
It must be uniformly applied to all gains from capital: all capital gains – without
regard to their specific source – should be added together. This total should be
taxed.
●
Losses on specific investments may be deducted from the total sum of a person’s
capital gains in a given fiscal year, but the losses in years with a negative total
income from capital cannot be deducted from capital gains taxes in future years. (In
Volt Belgium I Page 32 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
the same way that a person who has not worked for a time cannot deduct his
hypothetical loss of income during that time from his wage taxes when he/she has
found a job. We all share the negative consequences of economic downturns, but
the people owning capital should not disproportionately profit when the economy
gets going again)
●
Risk taking should not be discouraged by taxation, to achieve this we require a
flexible and easily accessible system of bankruptcy which will be set up by the
government. .This swift bankruptcy system will be made possible through fair
capital taxation when gains on capital are generated.
●
To encourage individuals to invest in start-up companies, an exemption on capital
gains taxation on the capital invested in the first X amount of years of a new
enterprise can be allowed.
●
We do not want to hit people’s retirement savings. But the progressiveness of the
capital gains tax plays a role here, as well as exemption of taxation in certain
strictly regulated cases, capped at a certain amount (eg. money invested in pension
funds, or a primary residence).
●
When an asset on which the capital gain is not realised is inherited, the beneficiary
will be liable to pay a capital gains tax upon the sale of that asset which will be
calculated from the moment that asset was obtained by the bequeather.
●
The government must set up a system that is capable of assessing an individual’s
capital so it can be taxed at a fair rate.
More background information about the capital gain tax can be found in THIS DOCUMENT
Pillar 5 - GLOBAL BALANCE
A.General: “Towards a more fair, equitable and
ecological world”
The future of humanity is in a critical state. From climate change
to migration, from health to digital transformation, the challenges
Volt Belgium I Page 33 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
we face are immense. We need European solutions for most of
those challenges. Belgium’s contribution should be state-of-the
art
in
regard
to
data-driven
solutions
and
science-based
investments and guide the EU towards a more equitable future.
The transition to a sustainable economy and society is essential
and is also a tool to reduce inequalities; we must take urgent and
radical steps to reduce our carbon footprint and safeguard the
future of our ecosystem for the generations to come. From
mobility to air quality, from energy to waste management, from
agriculture to food security, these challenges are societal and
require each and every one of us to contribute. As champions of
the circular economy, we will deploy a partnership model to
ensure that all stakeholders work in collaboration to achieve
lasting change to save our environment, our planet and our health.
A1. Smart and Sustainable mobility
Annually, millions of euros are lost by traffic congestion in Belgium. About 50,000 people
are wounded due to a traffic incident3. In conjunction with the negative impact of air
pollution (see below) the driving of cars across cities and motorways is exacerbating the
Belgian healthcare system with costs continuing to remain high for the Belgian state,
which it is not able invest into education, digital infrastructure or public infrastructure.  
Car-concentrated infrastructure requires a lot of space, reducing the space available for
people, recreational green areas whilst at the same time increasing the percentage of
concrete surface creating urban heat islands, in particular in cities like Brussels4.
Our Belgian state will rethink its mobility plan. It has to shift its transport infrastructure
towards non-car means of transport in order to improve air quality and reduce the
negative effects and ensure that Belgium is in the future a healthier society. It also
enables increased livability of cities and suburbs with more space for people by creating
more recreational areas. As a result of sharply reduced costs for congestion, spatial
occupation and healthcare, those measures will generate more economic growth.
To achieve this, Volt suggests policies and projects that build on supporting citizens rather
than punishing them. We want to bring positive changes such as more affordable public
transport, more and cheap or free bike sharing systems, more and safer cycling
infrastructures including more cycling highways, subsidising of car sharing systems and
sufficient availability of electric chargers. We will not introduce new or additional taxes on
people who do not have another choice than use a car. Instead we focus on providing
4 http://www.standaard.be/cnt/dmf20150420_01639850
3 https://statbel.fgov.be/en/themes/mobility/traffic/road-accidents
Volt Belgium I Page 34 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
alternatives to people as possible in order to achieve the Paris COP21 climate goals, to
improve Belgium´s WHO air pollution targets and increase economic growth. Volt
proposes to:
●
Significantly increase the budget for public transport – increased investments in
new train connections are needed to enable more people to leave their cars at
home. Trains should also be made more affordable5. We aim both for the extension
of urban and suburban networks, as well as new connections in rural areas that are
often disconnected from the railway transport network6. International train travel
should also be made more affordable. Belgium should take the initiative to push for
less expensive high-speed connections and work together with its European
partners to expand high-speed international train connections.
●
A new vision for cars  – we will get rid of bad inherited systems annually
subsidising company cars with billions of euros. Instead, we want to invest in
systems of the future, by enabling and promoting more electric car sharing
systems7. We also aim for sufficient availability of electric car charging stations to
make its use more user-friendly for people who buy an electric car.
●
Significantly increase investments in cycling infrastructure – increased and
sufficient investments in bicycle infrastructures are needed to get a higher
percentage of people on the bike and to increase traffic safety for people riding a
bike. We propose a connected network of cycling highways across Belgium8. We will
make these highways more secure by introducing separate lines for usual bikes and
electric bikes to reduce conflicts or dangerous traffic situations between manual
bikers and fast-bikers. We also aim for an increased and better network of bike
sharing systems across Belgium that are cheap and easy to use9.
●
Use improved mobility policy as a tool for improved urban planning and space
allocation – currently, an overwhelming part of space in cities is occupied by cars,
both for driving and parking. Sufficient public transportation, bike sharing systems
and (electric) car sharing systems will free up space in cities and suburbs. This will
allow for urban redevelopment and rehabilitation of city centres and suburbs10 with
more attention for social (including increased social contacts) and environmental
aspects, including more space for people and green areas. The latter can also
facilitate the reduction of urban heat islands.
10 Transport Environment, Does sharing cars really reduce car use?, (2017) available at:
https://www.transportenvironment.org/sites/te/files/publications/Does-sharing-cars-really-reduce-car-use-June%202017.pdf
9 Studies have shown that more people on bikes (and e-bikes) create a net economic gain for society (benefits-costs), in
contrast to people driving cars what is - despite tax benefits - a net cost for society.
8  Buekers, J., et al., Health impact model for modal shift from car use to cycling or walking in Flanders: application to two
bicycle highways. Journal of Transport & Health (2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jth.2015.08.003i
7 Studies indicate each shared car can replace 5 to 15 private cars and can reduce the share of car transportation.
https://www.transportenvironment.org/sites/te/files/publications/Does-sharing-cars-really-reduce-car-use-June%202017.pd
f
6 Lalive, R. et al., Does Supporting Passenger Railways Reduce Road Traffic Externalities? (2012) available at:
http://www.hsr.ca.gov/docs/newsroom/reports/2012/Passenger_Railways_Subsidy.pdf
5 Also national prices of train tickets in Belgium - currently most of the time higher compared to the fuel cost of a car with even
one passenger - should be lowered. The cost for doing this is reasonably low (the yearly ticket revenue of the NMBS is only €
797 million per year, which is for example far less than the annual subsidies for company cars).
Volt Belgium I Page 35 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
A2. An energy transition without taboos - nuclear energy
policy
Vision and purpose
The purpose of this policy is for Volt Belgium to have a clear standpoint on the topic of
Nuclear Energy within the Belgium context in line with the European Mapping of Policies.
Volt Belgium firmly believes that Nuclear Energy answers 5 of the main components of
the Global Balance Challenge of Volt Europa.
1.
It is a safe, reliable, stable and readily available source of Energy
2.
It guarantees Energy independence (of Belgium and of the EU) from any geopolitical
or weather situation. The fuel11 can easily be accumulated and stored into strategic
reserves for decades (e.g. the French Nuclear industry has enough Uranium reserves for
30 years12 of continuous operation13 of all its Nuclear Power Plants, with 3 to 5 years14 of
operations directly on its soil, on top of the fuel already in operating reactors).
3.
When talking about Long Term Operations (LTO)15 of Nuclear Power Plants (like it is
the case in Belgium today16), it is in line with the principle of circular economy. The
current plants can easily operate for another 20 to 40 years, meaning that less waste
would be generated, less raw materials would be required (steel, concrete, etc.) and
it would have the smallest footprint than any other source of energy.
4.
It also ensures an affordable and stable cost structure for electricity generation,
certainly for already operational power plants, as the economics of those are known,
with very little uncertainties (you don’t have a vast and complex construction project
to undergo, like you do in the case of new build projects).
5.
It does not produce any CO2 emissions nor any other harmful emissions that many
alternative dispatchable Energy sources produce (as those are mainly fossil fuels).
CO2 is only emitted by the construction of new plants (mostly from the chemical
reactions to make concrete) as well as in the mining operations of uranium1.
Policy proposal for the Belgian 2024 Electoral Program
Volt Belgium would repeal the law of the 31st of January 2003 (and not amend it).
Volt would make a new legislative proposal to have a clear framework for the Nuclear
Power industry. This new law could be entitled “Nuclear Energy for a Sustainable Future”.
16 Position of the Federal Nuclear Control Agency on the LTO of Doel 4 and Tiange 3:
https://afcn.fgov.be/fr/dossiers/centrales-nucleaires-en-belgique/exploitation-long-terme-lto-des-c
entrales-nucleaires-0
15Detailed information and reports of the LTO of Doel 1&2 and Tihange 1:
https://afcn.fgov.be/fr/dossiers/centrales-nucleaires-en-belgique/exploitation-long-terme-lto-des-c
entrales-nucleaires
14
https://www.orano.group/fr/decodage/nucleaire-un-atout-pour-l-independance-energetique-de-la-f
rance
13 https://www.assemblee-nationale.fr/14/amendements/2230/AN/896.asp
12 https://www.sfen.org/rgn/point-projet-astrid-recherches-multi-recyclage-poursuivent/
11 https://www.orano.group/fr/decodage/tout-savoir-sur-l-uranium
Volt Belgium I Page 36 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
The details of this new legislation shall be developed further with all Volt Belgium
members in the lead up to the 2024 parliamentary elections and would of course be
discussed in a Parliamentary Commission if it is elected in the Belgian Parliament in 2024.
Volt Belgium's core policy vision are based and can be summarised in the following points:
1.
Allow the operation of existing nuclear power plants for as long as it is
technically feasible whilst always adhering to the highest levels of nuclear safety.
2.
Create a legislative environment where private operator would be interested to
build and operate potential new nuclear power plants;
3.
Develop and promote the recycling of spent nuclear fuel in order to reduce the
amount of radioactive waste as well as reduce the amount of fresh (natural)
uranium needed for energy generation;
4.
Nuclear energy generation should contribute more to the Belgian federal budget in
order to promote R&D on new energy projects. The special nuclear tax levied
since 2013 should be reinforced and used for Research and Development in new
Energy Projects.
5.
Commit on a long term strategy for long lived radioactive waste at a European
level. This will ensure to have the best sites for deep geological repository, but also
to have a strategy for the reuse and recycling of what is now considered waste but
could be used as fuel in the future.
Volt’s policy wants to put nuclear and the technological developments around nuclear
energy, plant safety, radioactive waste treatments & recycling, and the arrival of fusion at
the heart of its vision and political strategy.
Belgium was also the pioneer of spent fuel recycling processes in the past. These were
banned in the context of the Nuclear phase-out, and most of these industries and
processes were sold to French multinationals under the impulse of the National
Government.
Volt wants to reactivate the industrial sector of nuclear spent fuel recycling. This will allow
a reduction of the need for natural Uranium, and create even more jobs in the national
nuclear industry. It also further reduces the impact on the environment.
Legislative Proposals
Volt Belgium proposes the following main Articles to ensure safe and reliable Nuclear
Energy in Belgium:
Article 1 - Nuclear Energy to be a key part of Belgium’s Electricity mix
Nuclear Energy is a key part of Belgium’s electricity mix, and should remain as such
together with variable renewable energies (solar and wind). Demand response strategies
Volt Belgium I Page 37 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
as well as efficient storage systems (such as Coo), home and community batteries, V2G
(Vehicle-to-Grid), just to state a few,
and all other promising solutions for grid load
balancing should be supported in order to allow the integration of these variable energies
into the electricity mix.
Article 2 - Repeal the law of 2003 and enable a safe environment for Nuclear Operators
To enable this, the exploitation of Nuclear Reactors needs to be allowed without any
sunset clause. This goes without saying that constant and independent supervision of the
Federal Agency for Nuclear Control, in order to ensure the highest level of safety and
adhere to the strictest international standard, needs to be guaranteed. Operating Permits
will need to be updated and revised every 10 years under the supervision of this
independent Agency.
In order to fulfill this intention, Volt would initiate a vote in parliament to repeal the law of
31 January 2003 and replace it with a specific law outlining the conditions for the
industrial use of Nuclear Energy for electricity generation as well as green/pink Hydrogen.
Article 3 - Ensure economic viability of Nuclear Energy without putting the burden on
public finances
Negotiate with the current operator to ensure security of supply of the nation, whilst
looking for alternative concessionaires in order to take over the industrial exploitation of
the Nuclear Power Plants if the current operator isn’t industrially interested to pursue a
purpose in Nuclear Energy.
Article 4 - Create a new legal framework for Nuclear Energy
This new law would allow the construction of new nuclear fission reactors according to the
government's strategic plans for energy generation (in the same way that tenders are
setup for Off-Shore wind farms).
The framework would foster an investment friendly environment for novel ideas in energy
generation and management. Volt wants to ensure that all energy production technology
gets a fair chance, whilst ensuring its sustainability and limited environmental impact
(whether that is on climate change, biodiversity or human health).
Article 5 – Using Nuclear as the source of financing for new energy sources
Nuclear should also not hinder the development of additional or alternative solutions.
Therefore, the existing “rente nucléaire”/”nucleaire rente” tax will be exclusively used
towards the development of new energy solutions, including fusion, the optimisation and
development and implementation of existing solutions, as well as the development of
novel non-nuclear based solutions (R&D).
Volt Belgium I Page 38 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
For more background information and considerations for this policy, you can have a look
at The Appendix Document to this Policy Proposal
A.3. Catapult Belgium towards a Circular Economy
Government authorities, citizens and businesses have to join forces to fully seize the
growth and development opportunities in the transition to a circular economy. Our goal is
a state that pursues green growth solutions and innovative ideas to create a better
environment for its citizens and business while creating jobs and improve every citizens´
life quality.
Important efforts have been undertaken in Belgium to implement its circular economy, yet
the country has fallen short in comparison to its performance in 2015. The main reason is
the low implementation of eco-innovation, the lack of participatory approaches to
innovate with and for citizens and the limited support for the development of an enabling
business environment.
Volt proposes to empower citizens, businesses, academia and knowledge centers to
innovate together fostering a sense of policy ownership that can lead to more sustainable
and lasting change. Volt will also create a waste reduction roadmap gathering all
stakeholders of the waste sector.
●
Partnership for the circular economy –  the public sector should act as facilitator
favoring the exchange of ideas and initiatives to pursue the transition to circular
economy. It should set up a platform involving the main actors and encourage the
implementation of participatory projects to test different ways for the public
sector to catalyse the transition to a circular economy.
●
Waste reduction roadmap – waste sector actors should convey around a common
roadmap for developing the sector towards a circular economy and a circular
resource market. The scope of the roadmap is to define an innovative approach of
“production- consumption-waste”: from the design phase to the products’ end of
life, making it possible to reduce inputs, reuse and recycle secondary or wasted
material at any stage. Furthermore the synergy between waste actors will further
develop a circular and integrated resource market.
●
Spurring eco-innovation – further research is needed to rethink products and
develop new ones together with creative business models17. Together with its
regions and its communities Belgium should launch an international science hub for
knowledge and talent to meet, thrive and flourish.
●
Rethinking food systems – a complete circular economy is not only about material
and products but also about food. Our current dietary habits are contributing to
the unreasonable waste of resources and ecological problems, as one third of
purchased food is lost in supply chain every year and the production of our food
requires the largest consumption of natural resources as fresh water18. Volt
propose to define a common food strategy with a focus on a circular economy
approach to half its food waste by 2030, by boosting food donation, reduce
18 https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/7/2/1429
17 https://ec.europa.eu/environment/ecoap/indicators/index_en
Volt Belgium I Page 39 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
packaging (especially plastic packaging), facilitate the consumption of ugly fruit
and vegetables19.
The mentioned actions will also lead to the ban plastics, reduce water and soil
consumption as well as decrease environmental pollution20.
A4. An air quality plan that saves lives
Belgium performs poorly in terms of air quality compared to other EU countries. According
to the Environmental Performance Index (EPI), Belgium has one of the worst air quality in
Europe and continuously exceeds emissions limits21.
Volt proposes an ambitious plan to tackle air pollution. Volt will contribute to initiatives
for reducing the air pollution and by 2020 will set an ambitious plan for lowering target
values complying with the National Emission Ceiling (NEC) Directive. We also support
initiatives such as sensor networks for air quality and projects such as Curieuzeneuzen
where citizens can be highly involved in providing valuable data to public measurement
efforts to ensure that efforts are made to reduce air pollution:
●
Better implementation of regulation – it is necessary to understand current
legislative gaps, and to set clear legislative and non-legislative measure in
coordination between state, regions and cities for all major pollutants.
●
Deploy digital and technological solution to facilitate the monitoring and
control of emission, enforce regulation and measures, pursue polluters – to
fully exploit the potential of technological development, Belgium should increase
the collaboration with knowledge centers to better understand and model the
impact of major pollutants on human health.
●
New regulations to reduce major pollutants – to get back down to the limits that
are proposed by the WHO, additional regulation and greater ambition  is needed.
This includes reglementations on transportation, residential warming with wood
stoves and agriculture and industry.  
●
Improved finance for air quality research and monitoring – investing is crucial for
Belgium
to
improve
its
air
quality.
Investment
should
be
mobilised
for
infrastructures. (e.g. that government institutes are able to buy monitoring
instruments such as instruments for real-time monitoring of particulate matter
composition and instruments to improve the collection of real-time traffic emission
data to improve air pollution models).
B.“Local Pillar: Citizen Centered Urban Spaces”
As the world recovers from COVID-19, we want to accelerate the
21 http://www.irceline.be/news/environmental-performance-index-epi-does-belgium-have-europes-worst-air-quality
20 OECD, Managing water sustainably is key to the future of food and, last accessed 19.03.2019, available at:
agriculturehttp://www.oecd.org/agriculture/topics/water-and-agriculture/
19 Sustainability, Cutting Food Waste through Cooperation along the Food Supply Chain, available at: Food and Agriculture
Organisation of the United Nations (FAO), Save Food: Global Initiative on Food Loss and Waste Reduction, available at
http://www.fao.org/save-food/resources/keyfindings/en/
Volt Belgium I Page 40 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
transformation of urban spaces into inclusive and sustainable
places where citizens' wellbeing is prioritized. Empty offices will
be transformed into green spaces for recreation, social housing
through incentives for sustainable entrepreneurship. We will
further improve city health by significantly reducing traffic and
pollution,
setting
norms
on
industry
and,
where
feasible,
transforming roads into green spaces and pedestrian and cycling
zones.
Citizens are demanding a change: students and pupils are asking for a better
environmental future, bike riders for a more sustainable mobility able to increase traffic
safety and improve air quality while reducing traffic congestions, households to cut energy
costs, citizens for a more healthier and liveable country. Shift to a low-carbon and circular
economy, foster investment in renewable energies, move to a smart and efficient mobility
and transform our approach to production, consumption and waste, is not only possible,
but necessary and achievable.
Our current economic model is outdated and based on the unsustainable use of finite
resources (environmental as well as human) - create value and then waste. Together with
an
individual-oriented
vision
on
mobility
(promotion of private cars, insufficient
investments in public transport), this wasteful model has presented severe limitations and
has had adverse ramifications on our environment.
At the same time, air pollution22 in Belgium is leading to more than 11,000 premature
deaths in Belgium as a result of cancer, cardiovascular and respiratory health deficits and
other significant health problems23.
Our proposed changes do not occur in isolation, but rather in a broader joint European
effort to build a sustainable Europe. Volt proposes positive measures with a significant
impact such as more investments in sustainable mobility and circular economy, that can
foster a new green deal.
B1. 15-minute Cities
This is a general evidence-based framework to implement 15-minutes cities across
Belgium. It allows for local flexibility and puts citizen participation at the heart of urban
transformation.
General idea & principles
23 The European Environment Agency (EEA) in its report concerning air quality in Europe, reveals that in 2015, in Belgium,
11,200 people died prematurely due to the effects of air pollution. Moreover, in 2018 Belgium has been referred to the
Court of Justice, because it has been failing to respect the agreed air quality limit values and for failing to take appropriate
measures to keep exceedance periods as short as possible.
22 Off which car & truck transport is one of the major causes - on car-free sundays air pollutant concentrations of nitrogen
dioxide , black carbon and ultrafine particulate matter are >50% lower compared to an average Sunday (.The Lancet
Commission on pollution and health 2017)
Volt Belgium I Page 41 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
During the last decades, vicious cycles of road expansions and new parking spots to
accommodate car traffic rather than expanding investments into modes that are efficient
users of road space, such as public transit, walking and cycling, converted streets into
unhealthy pass throughs. We can convert streets from places where people move through
to healthy places where people enjoy being, enjoy living, enjoy working and can easily
reach essential functions within a walkable distance.
What does a 15-minute city have?
Walkable and bikeable neighborhoods need to be the norm, not the exception. They need
to be accessible financially, not just physically. To make these places vastly more
common, the simple yet powerful 15-minute city concept needs to occupy a central role in
our urban discussions. It is the urban planning equivalent of human-centered design: start
by looking at where an individual lives and where they need to get to, and figure out how
to retool our neighborhoods and cities to get the kind of “hyper proximity” and ease of
access that makes urban living great. Also public transportation should be accessible
and affordable for all: while the 15-minute city provides all essential services nearby,
people should still be able to travel, visit friends and discover places.
The 15-minute city requires minimal travel among housing, offices, restaurants, parks,
hospitals, public transport hubs and cultural venues. Each neighborhood should fulfil six
social functions: Living, Working, Supplying, Caring, Learning, Enjoying
Carlos Moreno’s 15-minute city framework highlights four key characteristics:
●
Proximity: Things must be close.
●
Diversity: Land uses must be mixed to provide a wide variety of urban amenities
nearby.
●
Density: There must be enough people to support a diversity of businesses in a
compact land area.
●
Ubiquity: These neighborhoods must be so common that they are available and
affordable to anyone who wants to live in one.
Benefits of the 15-minute city
The 15-minutes city is a proposition that can increase our wellbeing in multiple ways: some
of the most important advantages are:
-
Benefits environment and health through limiting greenhouse gas emissions and
health-damaging air pollution by cars (e.g. less asthma, less myocardial
infarctions, less brain damage, improved mental health through reduction of air
pollution).
-
Reduces the occupation of valuable public space by car lanes and car parkings
that instead can be used for urban green and public meeting places.
-
It stimulates active and multimodal transport, resulting in health gains through
increased physical activity (reduced obesity).
Volt Belgium I Page 42 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
-
It makes cities more enjoyable as people tend to have more social interactions
and local connections in streets with lower amounts of car-traffic
-
It makes housing more affordable: inequality can be reduced between
neighborhoods because they will have necessary functionalities nearby.
-
It enables individual freedom and wellbeing while it also focuses on local
communities and participation
How do we get there?
The following elements are critical:
●
Broad public engagement and buy-in: Diverse communities must be involved in
developing and implementing 15-minute city programs. Legendary urbanist Jane
Jacobs said it well in The Death and Life of Great American Cities: “Cities have the
capability of providing something for everybody, only because, and only when, they
are created by everybody.”
●
Detailed measurement and analysis: We must define and quantify who has access
to what and where. It is a big data exercise that must be informed by an equally
important community engagement exercise that identifies what should be
measured. The question “what is important to access?” needs to be answered by
city residents, not by planners. Local residents are often more aware of the current
problems and possible fixes than planners from outside the city. And measurement
must be continuous, so that a city can measure improvements in proximity and
access over time and hold leaders accountable for making that progress.
●
Engaging all types of actors: all relevant stakeholders should be part of the
process, from urban planners to government agencies, to neighborhood leaders,
nonprofits, entrepreneurs, investors, business organizations, action groups and
academia.
●
Cost-effectiveness: The most successful efforts will make maximum use of free or
inexpensive strategies such as flexible zoning requirements and creative reuse of
existing street space. It’s important to work with market forces where possible,
and stimulate local innovative start-ups and entrepreneurship rather than
fighting against them, while always recognizing that market forces will provide too
little of many of the things that make cities great.
Sources
-
Ted talk Carlos Moreno :
https://www.ted.com/talks/carlos_moreno_the_15_minute_city
-
BBC: How 15 minutes will change the way we socialise
-
San Francisco: https://www.15minutecity.com/blog/hello
-
DivercityMag: https://www.divercitymag.be/en/the-15-minute-city/
-
Gervero, R., Guerra, E., Al, S. (2017) Beyond mobilitie, Planning cities for People and
Places. Book.
-
Marshall, W.E., Piatkowski, D.P., Garrick, N.W., “Community Design, Street Networks
and Public Health”, Journal of Transport and Health 1, no. 4 (2014): 326-340
Volt Belgium I Page 43 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
B2.
Monthly
Car-free
sundays
in
cities
with
>
50,000
inhabitants
●
Volt proposes to implement a monthly car-free Sunday in all Belgian cities with
a population of > 50 000 inhabitants. The main purpose of the car-free Sundays is
to promote healthy, livable cities and demonstrate how living in a city with a lower
degree of car-dependency could be. It is also the purpose to use the car-free cities
as a tool to create awareness regarding the considerable environmental and health
burdens associated with motorized road transport. Traffic-related air pollution
causes a large burden of disease, hospitalization and death while for example,
traffic-related air pollution such as Nitrogen Dioxide, Black Carbon and Ultrafine
Particles, can be 50-80% lower on car-free sundays in cities compared to average
sundays. And in addition, moving away from car dependency has important public
health and environmental benefits, not just from lower air pollution but also from
increased physical activity and less space occupation by cars. Pedestrians and
cyclists can enjoy the city more than ever, traveling on roads that are otherwise
dangerous and difficult to cross. On a car-free Sunday, large parts of cities can be
transformed from places where people only want to pass through to places people
actually love being. In addition, on car-free Sundays can strongly boost the local
economy by joyful activities and events that can be organized in large parts of cities
that are normally occupied by cars.
Further, on car-free Sundays, all public
transport should be available for free in those cities.
Volt Belgium I Page 44 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
Pillar +1 - STATE REFORM
“A stronger and smarter Belgium for all
citizens”
Belgian
governance
today
is
challenged
by
a
fragmented
democracy
and
inefficient
political
structure.
A
pragmatic
approach towards the regional and national responsibilities is
required to best serve and bring regions and federal entities
together.
As
a
Pan-European
Belgian
party we will, while
respecting the communities, strengthen the federal government
of Belgium. We aim to deconflict competences and to increase
cooperation and harmonization
between communities, regions
and
the
federal
government.
We
strive
for
all
levels
of
government
to
be
more
efficient
in
organisation
and
administration and bring it closer to the citizens. We envision
innovative
means
of
citizen
participation
in
policy-making,
especially at the local level, in addition to the representative
system.
1. A European Defence
Volt Belgium strongly supports the European-level vision for the future of European
Security and Defence and agrees with the three building blocks on which it is based:
1.
Democratic decision-making. Matters of European security and defence on all
levels must be decided as part of a democratic and parliamentary process and
security forces must be under civilian command.
2.
A fully integrated defence force, under a European Ministry of Defence that allow
the EU to respond autonomously to conventional and nonconventional threats to
its territory and population.
3.
Create a common security culture and ensure that security forces across Europe
defend the same enlightened values of democracy, justice, multilateralism,
freedom and equality; wherever they have to operate.
At the Belgian level, Volt Belgium encourages continued and increased cooperation with
all EU Allies in general and the BENELUX partners specifically. The unification of the
BENELUX airspace, the Belgian-Dutch naval cooperation and continued bi- and tri-national
military deployment around the globe all count as examples of best practice. However,
Belgian Defence must keep its eye on the future as well. The Scorpion Program allow for
intense cooperation with France, as does the procurement of the F-35’s with Italy, the
Netherlands, Denmark and Norway. Finally, other hiatus must be filled with new ideas and
Volt Belgium I Page 45 Page


Volt Belgium - Mapping of Policies
new types of cooperation. International cooperation is required in order to offer our
soldiers proper CBRN-protection and medical care in operations.
There is only one way forward in order to guarantee a real and proper European security,
the European way forward.
2. Making animal rights a constitutional right
Volt demands the welfare and dignity of animals to be included  in the Belgian
constitution. Animals are sensitive creatures that should have their rights to be defended.
Because public opinion has evolved demanding the rights of animals to be adequately
defended. is therefore high time that our Constitution evolves. Other countries, including
our European neighbours such as Germany, Luxembourg and Switzerland already have
animal protection embedded in their constitutions.
The Belgian Constitution is based on a series of divergent and fundamental principles,
such as the right to the protection of a healthy environment. Animal protection definitely
belongs tothat list. It has since been scientifically proven that animals (certainly the
species with which we surround ourselves and which we use) have a consciousness. We
therefore focus on the species that are known to be in pain and suffering experienced (i.e.
at least all vertebrates, cephalopods and certain other molluscs).
This constitutional change will encourage governments to introduce increasingly better
laws and policies to protect animals. This gives animals a fundamental basis that legally
justifies the adoption of concrete measures. Moreover, this will give the Courts of Appeal,
and in particular the Constitutional Court, legitimate reasons for judging the merits of a
new law for the protection of animals.. Animals and their welfare will count much more
and gain in value and importance for their own good. This will make our society more just.
Caring for the most vulnerable anchors in the Constitution is proof of social civilization. It
is an important step towards the recognition of legal personality for animals.
Volt Belgium I Page 46 Page


