Volt’s Mapping of Policies
Edition 9.0
Challenge 5+1 - EU Reform
1


Table of contents:
Vision for Europe
4
Institutional Reform and Governance
6
General principles
6
The legislative branch
7
The executive branch
9
The Judiciary
11
Dispositions for European elected officials
11
Other provisions for good governance
13
G. Provisions for a European Constitution
15
Constitutional principles
15
Individual and collective rights
17
Institutions
17
Competences
19
Economic and financial reform
21
Vision
21
Euro Summit & Eurogroup
21
European Central Bank
22
Eurozone+ Budget
23
European Stability Mechanism
23
Banking Supervision
24
Competences of an EU Economic and Finance Minister
25
EU Corporate Tax
25
Concentration charges
26
European Deposit Insurance
27
The Stability and Growth Pact
27
Justice & Home Affairs
28
Vision
28
Border protection
28
European police, intelligence, and cyber security
30
Migration and refugee policy
31
Abiding by the UN Refugee Convention
31
Principle of country of first arrival
32
Other provisions
32
Foreign and Neighbourhood Policy Reform
34
Vision
34
EU Institutional Capacity-Reform of the EEAS
34
EU relationships with the United Nations and other multilateral institutions
35
Relationship with the United Nations
35
Relationship with other multilateral institutions
37
Smart Power
38
EU neighbourhood policy
39
Western Balkan integration
40
Eastern Partnership
41
Southern Neighbourhood
42
Bilateral relations with Türkiye (Turkey)
42
EU China Policy
43
2


Human Rights
43
Climate
44
Europe
44
Development Cooperation
45
Supply Chains, Trade Inequality, Technology & 5G
46
South China Sea
47
Taiwan
47
The future of China
48
Security and Defence Policy Reform
50
Vision
50
Democratic Decision-Making
53
Integrated European Defence Forces
54
Common security culture
56
Relationship with other security actors
58
3


Challenge +1 - EU Reform
I.
Vision for Europe
The European Union is our common project. Following centuries of conflict, we have
managed to come together and build a union that has ensured peace and prosperity
for over sixty years. We are proud of this achievement.
Yet, the Union is still waiting for its completion. We have seen how crises continue to
strain our common project due to a failure to address the underlying issues, whether
they are economic, immigration, energy, or security-related.
In an era where autocratic actors use European reluctance to expand their power and
erode democracy around the world, timid steps toward integration are no longer
sufficient.
Europeans have missed out on opportunities for sustainable economic growth. We
could have recovered faster from the financial crisis, but EU countries stuck to their
austerity plans and structural deficiencies, which were built on a lack of solidarity. We
were unable to act decisively and quickly enough during the pandemic and Russia's
attack on Ukraine. We appear incapable of overcoming our reliance on energy from
autocratic regimes, and we would be unable to defend ourselves without NATO,
which has an uncertain future. Every year, thousands of immigrants die at our borders.
We hold politicians accountable for these collective failures because they prioritise
their national interests over the interests of all Europeans. We are convinced that the
EU requires a new foundation that allows European citizens, rather than national
politicians, to make decisions based on their convictions.
In many regions, we have inefficient and opaque public administrations that are rife
with corruption, resulting in high unemployment, impeding investment and the
growth of small businesses. Larger corporations have benefited from easier market
access and lower labour costs, but workers have not received harmonised social
protections. Wealthy individuals and corporations continue to take advantage of legal
differences between countries in order to avoid paying their fair share, leaving
everyone else to foot the bill. In general, people do not feel represented in the
Union and see decisions as being imposed from above.
Volt arose from a crisis of European integration during a period of mistrust for joint
endeavours. We came together to affirm the strength of the European project, our
commitment to joint efforts, and our belief in our shared future. Our message is one
4


of hope, audacity, and of solidarity. A message to all that the sirens of division will not
demolish what we have patiently constructed. Volt was founded to serve as a pillar of
the European project and to revitalise its construction. Volt offers European citizens a
new vision of Europe, one that embraces our common aspirations while correcting
our shortcomings.
We believe in a Europe that balances the freedoms of its single market with
strengthened social protections and inclusion, where companies and labour can
move around freely and this flexibility is not detrimental to workers anywhere. As a
result, our vision is that of a social Europe, which successive leaders have frequently
mentioned but never implemented. We support a Europe in which citizens across the
Union can come together to defend their common interests, where solidarity means
supporting one another and accepting joint responsibility for our common future,
where we actively support the development of our poorer regions and help raise
their standard of living, and where citizens across the Union can come together to
defend their common interests.
5


II.
Institutional Reform and Governance
The reform of the European Union must start with the reform of its governance and
institutions. A house divided against itself cannot stand, and the EU can no longer
remain half-integrated and half-split, partly economically unified and sometimes
politically nationalised. Therefore, the solution to the Union’s ongoing troubles is not
a question of “more Europe” or “less Europe”, but of a “better Europe," including
better institutions.
We believe in democracy; we believe that democracy is the best political system for
protecting our individual liberties, human rights, and the rule of law.
As true believers in democracy, we cannot circumscribe it to certain areas of
policy-making only; we must instead exercise it at the local level, at the national level,
and at the European level. Living and delivering this very democracy, at all levels, is
the key to restoring the trust of European citizens in their institutions and to finding
common solutions to common problems. As we can already see in our national
systems, democracy was never about agreeing—this is impossible—but about
managing our disagreements and building a fair decision-making process that we can
all support.
Expanding and ensuring democracy at the European level will require fundamental
changes in our institutions: some we can achieve right away, others will require treaty
changes. Volt is fully aware of the difficulty of reforming EU institutions, but we will
not be deterred from pushing for reform in favour of more transparency, more
efficiency, and true democracy. This is the only way to achieve a qualitative change
and finally realise a federal Europe.
The proposals below are further detailed in Volt’s adopted Provisions for a European
Constitution.
A. General principles
First and foremost, in the establishment of good governance and a good government,
there are six guiding principles in the Volt-Philosophy, which all institutions and
organisational decisions must aim to embed in their foundation.
➢Democracy. Volt supports institutions that give more decision-making power to
the European people. This implies both ensuring that citizens’ representatives
hold the bulk of the power and that these representatives have incentives to
represent the general interests of their constituency.
6


➢Subsidiarity. Volt supports increased competencies at the European level only
if that is the level at which they are best handled. All matters should be
handled by the most appropriate level of government.
➢Efficiency. Volt supports the establishment of institutions that can act
effectively, we must avoid the creation and continuation of institutions that are
gridlocked by the need for consensus.
➢Transparency. Volt supports popular involvement in political decision-making
and believes that the people need to have access to what their representatives
discuss and decide.
➢Clarity. Unlike the current institutional set-up, Volt supports institutions and
procedures that citizens can understand and make their own.
➢Ease of citizen involvement. Volt supports a system which is, from elections to
1
popular
contributions,
designed
to
simplify
and
encourage
citizens’
involvement. Our policy proposals below rest upon these principles.
➢Future Fit (Ready): Volt reflects their decision-making with regards to the
needs of present and future generations.
B. The legislative branch
The legislative branch is the most important institution in the democratic system. It
expresses the voice of the people through their representatives. It must be elected
democratically and be as close to the people as possible. It must be empowered to
draft, discuss, and adopt our legislation. Despite national differences, this is a
democratic requirement to which all European countries have long adhered, and
enshrining democracy at the European level requires a similar arrangement.
The current state of the European legislature is limited in many ways. The European
Parliament is elected directly, but its election modalities differ from country to
country, and MEPs are often elected at the national level, not locally. Despite having
increased its role among European institutions, the European Parliament still lacks the
basic power to propose legislation. And, for its part, the Council of the European
Union is made up of various configurations of national ministers depending on the
topic under discussion and trumps the legislative power of Parliament. Finally, the
European
Council,
an
executive
body
whose
role
is
limited
to
strategic
1 For more details, see Citizen Empowerment, Strengthen citizens’ ability to influence politics,
Strengthen ability of citizens to influence politics beyond elections, Empower citizens and government
to take concrete action.
7


decision-making
by
the
Treaty
of
Lisbon,
regularly intervenes in day-to-day
decision-making, bypassing the regular legislative process.
➢Give the European Parliament the right to legislative initiative. A parliament
consisting of directly elected representatives is the best-suited body to design
laws that respond to the people’s demands and needs. As a first step towards a
more democratic law-making process, Volt supports allowing the European
Parliament to initiate laws by granting it the right to legislative initiative. With
this, the European Parliament will finally be able to propose and discuss
legislative proposals stemming directly from the representatives of the people,
and not on the initiative or through the filter of national or European
executives.
➢Harmonise the adoption of EU legislation. Currently, the adoption of
legislation depends on the topic under discussion. Volt supports submitting all
European legislation to both EU legislative bodies – Parliament and Council –
for approval before it can become law. In the event of lingering disagreements
between both houses, a dedicated mechanism will attempt to iron out
differences. Should there remain disagreements, the European Parliament, as
the direct representative of the people, must have the final say.
➢Reform the election of the European Parliament. The current “degressive
proportionality” negates the core principle of “one person, one vote,” which
ensures equal say for all citizens in the political system. Volt therefore
proposes a voting system that enshrines this principle and combines the
election of representatives at the lowest level possible with the proportional
representation of political parties in Parliament.
○
In this system, Member States are divided into electoral districts of
roughly equal population; this division should be made, as far as
possible, along pre-existing administrative boundaries, and will be
controlled by an independent electoral commission to avoid attempts at
gerrymandering.
○
Citizens will have two votes on their voting ballot: one for their local
representative – one for each electoral district, thereby ensuring the
election of representatives close to the citizens – and one for national
lists of European political parties – filling supplementing seats to ensure
fair party proportionality in Parliament. The details will feature in a
European Electoral Law and apply equally to all Member States.
○
Volt also supports the direct election of the President of the European
Parliament by members of Parliament.
➢Reform the Council of the European Union. Formerly known as the Council of
Ministers, the Council is the EU’s second legislative chamber and currently
gathers ministers of Member States in charge of the topic under discussion. In
the short term, and in order to bring coherence to the Council’s work, Volt
8


supports abolishing the Council’s system of topic-based configurations and
replacing them with a single representative for each state. As is the case in
Parliament, the Council’s work will be split between initial discussions in
preparatory committees composed of a small group of representatives and
plenary sessions for discussions, amendments, and voting.
➢Turn the Council of the European Union into a full-fledged legislative
chamber. In the longer term, Volt strongly supports further democratisation of
the Council of the European Union through the election of its members either
directly by the citizens of the European Union or by the States’ lower houses.
This upper house would ensure the equal representation of states or feature a
low level of demographic proportionality. This would also counterbalance
population-based apportionment in the European Parliament and strengthen
the representation of smaller Member States. Volt also supports terminating
the current practice of a rotating presidency. Under the current system, every
country leads the Council for six months. This system prevents any long-term
work and keeps important policy issues from being followed through since the
responsible staff is constantly changing. Volt proposes the direct election of a
President of the Council by Council members.
➢Improve transparency provisions.
○
According to our general principles, Volt calls for full transparency of the
legislative branch, where discussions are broadcast live and recorded,
and each representative’s vote is registered and made public.
○
As a follow-up measure, Volt supports incorporating an obligation for
members of the legislatures to vote, and where they do not feel that any
choice is appropriate, they may submit a blank ballot.
○
When the vote is up for an election, in order to give a proper voice to
blank ballots and popular discontent, Volt supports invalidating votes
with a majority of blank ballots and re-organising them with new
candidates.
○
In order to prevent backroom deals and late-night arrangements that are
clearly detrimental to the proper functioning of democracy, Volt
proposes a seventy-two-hour delay between the online publication of a
bill and its vote in either legislative house. This is to ensure that citizens
and the watchful press are provided at least the minimum amount of
time
to
review
and
react
to
the
bills
that
are
voted
on
by
representatives.
C. The executive branch
The executive branch has the crucial role of guiding the implementation of laws and
contributing to the policy-making process. In order to carry out its duties, it must be
9


reformed to properly reflect popular opinion and be made more efficient in its
actions.
➢Enforce existing limits on, and eventually abolish, the European Council.
The European Council currently consists of the European Heads of State or
Government. In the short term, Volt recalls that its prerogatives must be
strictly limited to those prescribed in the treaties, which are to provide “the
Union with the necessary impetus for its development and [define] the general
political directions and priorities thereof.” It is clearly stated that “it shall not
exercise legislative functions.” The European Council should therefore not be
involved in everyday political matters, leaving elected representatives to
decide.
The
European
Council
also
enshrines
intergovernmental
decision-making, which gives undue power to economically strong countries,
which can strong-arm smaller or poorer countries. In line with our democracy
principle,
Volt
supports
executive
decision-making
by
truly
European,
supranational bodies. In the medium term, Volt calls for the European Council
to be abolished entirely.
➢Make the Commission’s portfolios subject-oriented. Despite a provision in
the Lisbon Treaty to limit its size, the Commission is currently hampered in its
functioning by the requirement to include as many commissioners as there are
Member States and to provide a portfolio to each Member State. These
constraints—which no country would ever implement for itself—are clearly
detrimental to the efficient work of the Commission. Volt calls for the removal
of these rules and for the President of the Commission to freely decide on the
size, composition, and attribution of his/her/their team, with due regard for
gender representation but no considerations for national citizenship.
➢Strengthen the leading candidate. Following the introduction of the leading
candidate in 2014, Volt supports the nomination of leaders of parties or
coalitions for European elections and proposes the election of the President of
the Commission by a vote of the newly elected European Parliament.
➢Move from commissioners to ministers, starting by creating positions for
finance and foreign ministers. As an immediate measure and in order to
strengthen economic governance, Volt supports the creation of the position of
a finance minister for the Union. Likewise, in order to streamline the
governance of foreign affairs, Volt calls for the full integration of the European
External Action Service (EEAS) into the Commission and the replacement of the
position of High Representative/Vice President (HR/VP) by that of Foreign
Minister.
➢Establish a true European government. To thoroughly reform the European
executive and increase citizens’ empowerment, Volt supports the creation of a
parliamentary democracy, where a Prime Minister, elected by and from the
10


European Parliament, leads a federal cabinet of ministers and guides the
day-to-day policy work of the Union. The Prime Minister will be directly
accountable to Parliament and depend on its confidence; Parliament will be
able to hold a vote of no confidence upon agreeing on a new Prime Minister. A
European President, elected either directly by citizens or by a body of
democratically elected representatives, will act as an overarching figure of
unity. Among other things, he/she will sign bills adopted by the legislative
branch into law. In periods of regular political activity, the prerogatives of the
President will be mostly limited to a ceremonial role.
D. The Judiciary
The Rule of Law is an essential foundation of democracy and ensures that laws are
compatible with our principles and values and, in particular, do not infringe on
citizens’ fundamental freedoms.
➢Extend the prerogatives of the European Court of Justice (ECJ). In line with
the Court’s growth in recent years, Volt calls for the extension of the
prerogatives of the ECJ to remove the need for national referral and to include
a review of the compatibility of national and EU law with EU treaties; the
settlement of relevant disputes to which the European Union is a party;
disputes between Member States; between a State and citizens of another
State; between citizens of different States; and other similar cases. Appropriate
and dissuasive sanctions must be made available to ensure that Member States
abide by EU law.
➢Create regional branches of the ECJ. Accompanying this increased role of the
ECJ, Volt supports the creation of branches of the Court, with each branch
covering a few countries, to make it better able to handle an increased
caseload, place the court and European law closer to the citizens, and improve
its overall efficiency.
E. Dispositions for European elected officials
Ensuring democracy and fair representation at the European level is as much a
question of institutions as it is of elected officials.
➢Enforce gender equality on party lists. Mindful of the importance of
promoting gender equality in political representation, Volt proposes that all
party lists for list-based elections be gender-alternated in their ranking of
candidates, meaning the list would not have twice the same gender
consecutively.
11


➢Reform regulations on European political parties. Volt calls for a reform of
the regulations on European political parties in order to support the creation of
real European parties in lieu of the collections of national parties we see today;
this must include the recognition of national branches as part of one single
European structure and the possibility of joint financing for campaigns across
European countries, with proper regulations and monitoring.
➢Ensure a link between representatives and their constituents. Within the
framework of a reformed European voting system and with a view to
strengthening the link between European citizens and their European-level
representatives and avoiding parties sending unknown candidates across the
Union, Volt supports a requirement for locally-elected MEPs to be residents of
the district they seek election for, as long as they are residents for at least six
months in that district. Similarly, as long as nation states remain central to the
2
EU's political structure, Volt believes that candidates for the reformed Council
should be citizens of the state for which they seek election, regardless of
whether this citizenship was acquired through birth or naturalisation.
➢Regulate elective mandates. In order to propose the constant renewal of the
European elected officials, Volt supports reasonable term limits for all
European elective positions. These limits, which will be defined in the electoral
law, will aim at allowing for the development of professional and qualified
political elected officials while avoiding the encroachment of politicians on
their positions. Volt encourages durations of terms for the various mandates
that allow a synchronisation of elections in order to limit the occurrence of
electoral campaigns that alter the regular political process. In order to limit the
influence of money in politics, campaigns will be limited in their duration, and
campaign finance, including fund acquisition and limits on spending, will be
strictly controlled by an independent electoral commission.
➢Build trust in the people’s representatives. Finally, with due concern for the
public trust in its institutions and representatives, Volt proposes strict
requirements to prevent conflicts of interest. On the one hand, this means a
requirement for all European elected officials and candidates to disclose past
and present sources of income and any affiliation with or contribution to
private businesses, lobby groups, political parties, and associations, be it in a
paid or voluntary capacity. On the other hand, it means that individuals who
have been convicted of certain crimes, such as corruption, embezzlement, or
wilful misuse of public funds, are ineligible for elective office. Considering
popular representation as a full-time activity, Volt also believes that it is
impossible to combine a European elective mandate with other mandates or
positions.
2 An exception shall be made for MEPs who would have moved their residence from their district to
Brussels following their election; they shall be able to run for re-election despite not being residents of
their districts of election.
12


F. Other provisions for good governance
Following these main measures for improving European governance and institutions
come supplementary provisions aimed at clarifying and facilitating the Union’s
functionality.
➢Allow the creation of dedicated new institutions. The European legislature
must be given the power to establish all the required agencies for the good
functioning of the Union. In particular, Volt supports the establishment of an
intelligence agency and the transformation of Europol into a real European law
enforcement body. Mindful of the importance of regional development and
planned and sustainable urbanisation, Volt supports the Committee of the
Regions, as well as the creation of a new Committee of European Cities. Both of
which fulfil a valuable role as consultative bodies and platforms for dialogue
and best-practice exchange for local decision-makers. Volt also supports the
creation of an “Office for Future Generations” at the European level, which
consults and audits decision-makers with advice and support towards the needs
of present and future generations.
➢Facilitate more effective communication. In order to facilitate the Union’s
policy work, Volt supports the adoption of English as the single working
language for European institutions—this is irrespective of the languages
spoken by the Member States and relates to our principle of efficiency.
➢Set more predictable rules for secession. Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty
allows Member States to leave the Union but gives no indication of how to
conclude this decision. In order to strengthen rule-based processes and
increase predictability, Volt supports the adoption of harmonised rules for
secession at the EU level. Volt recognises the complexity of this issue and calls
for an open debate for the adoption of proposed rules.
➢Establish
a
clear
and
harmonised
framework
for
regional
self-determination.3
○
Seeking to bring all Europeans together for the benefit of all and
believing that we are stronger when we come together, Volt sees
secession from a Member State as a last resort. Volt therefore strongly
encourages Member States to take all necessary measures to ensure the
full representation of all citizens and to account for the legitimate
recognition of regional cultural identities. In this spirit, Volt encourages
people to work on living together in good faith and emphasises the need
3 In this policy, Volt considers “region” any given determined area within a Member State, whether it
formally holds the title of region or not.
13


for open and inclusive dialogue between local, national and European
levels and for proper subsidiarity and decentralisation.4
○
Should a genuine effort at dialogue fail, if necessary with the
intervention of a mediator, Volt recognises the right of a people to
self-determinate
via
the
organisation
of
a
peaceful,
legal
and
transparent process in full respect of the rule of law and with a clear
assessment of the legal outcome of secession, including outstanding
financial obligations. Unless under exceptional circumstances, including
5
clear and large-scale violations of human rights, a region should not
6
unilaterally declare independence from its member state.
○
If a strong will for self-determination is expressed, for instance through
a qualified majority and with a turnout threshold, Volt supports a
negotiated process of secession between the self-determining region
and its member-State; should a genuine and constructive effort at
negotiations fail or one party willingly stall, Volt recommends the
intervention of a European mediator −for instance, the proposed
President of the EU − to ensure the process moves forward.
7
8
○
Should the self-determining region choose to leave the European Union
nevertheless, a negotiated process will take place with the Union. If a
9
self-determining and seceding region wishes to remain within the Union,
Volt recommends the creation of the status of “Territory of the
European Union," where the region would be temporarily placed
following its secession from its Member State and before its potential
access to full EU membership.
A territory would continue to be subject
10
10 Max Planck Encyclopedia of Comparative Constitutional Law, Overseas Territories, Australia, France,
Netherlands, New Zealand, United Kingdom, United States of America, available at
http://opil.ouplaw.com/view/10.1093/law:epil/9780199231690/law-9780199231690-e1076?prd=EPIL
9 In case of referendum for self-determination, voters should be provided the opportunity to express
whether they wish to remain in or leave the Union.
8 Newsweek, Europe Must Step In and Resolve the Moves Toward Catalonia Secession, available at
http://www.newsweek.com/europe-must-step-and-resolve-moves-toward-catalonia-secession-693826
7 In the absence of a President of the EU, a mediator can be agreed by the parties or proposed by the
European Parliament.
6 “Any attempt to claim legal secession [...] must at least show that: [...] the state from which they are
seceding seriously violates their human rights; and there are no other effective remedies”, American
Society of International Law, Kosovo's Declaration of Independence: Self-Determination, Secession and
Recognition, available at
https://www.asil.org/insights/volume/12/issue/2/kosovos-declaration-independence-self-determinatio
n-secession-and
5 “The constitutionalization of a right to secede emerges as a means to soothe secessionist tendencies
(as with Quebec and Scotland) or prevent political escalation into a potential armed conflict (as with
New Caledonia and Montenegro).” Max Planck Encyclopedia of Comparative Constitutional Law,
Secession,
available at http://oxcon.ouplaw.com/view/10.1093/law-mpeccol/law-mpeccol-e459
4 “A rational discourse about regional identities and economic, social and cultural interests could be a
source of strength, draining away much of the peril from the current fractious secession conflicts.”
Social Europe, Learning From Catalonia: To Secede Or Not To Secede?, available at
https://www.socialeurope.eu/learning-catalonia-secede-not-secede
14


to EU legislation and would be required to fulfil all of a member state's
obligations. It will retain benefits such as full access to the single market
and free movement. However, it will not benefit from new EU funding or
investments and will only have non-voting representation in the
European Parliament and no representation in the Council.
The
11
decision to admit a territory as a member of the Union would be similar
to the regular accession procedure for EU membership.
➢Set up a two-tier integration system. With the goal of promoting increased
European integration and avoiding a blocking need for consensus, Volt
supports proposals for a two-tiered integration model that allows willing
countries to move forward with the integration of policy competences. This
system should aim at deepening integration in a coherent manner, and Volt
strongly opposes “à la carte” models where Member States pick and choose the
policies they subscribe to. In this system, countries willing to move forward
with integration would make up the first tier and move ahead to be uniformly
forged together. This system must not seek to penalise members of the second
tier but, on the contrary, give them incentives to join the first tier and
contribute to a more integrated and unified Europe.
➢Draft and adopt a European Constitution. Finally, in order to streamline the
Union’s functioning, Volt strongly supports the adoption of a European
Constitution, replacing existing EU treaties and detailing the fundamental
rights and responsibilities of citizens and the EU’s institutional arrangements.
As a legal and political document, this Constitution should be concise, readable,
and understandable by all citizens. Unlike current treaties, it should not try to
integrate all aspects and provisions of EU law, but focus on core institutional
aspects and leave the rest for the legislature to record into regular EU
legislation. Volt strongly supports the writing and adoption of this Constitution
by representatives of European citizens. In particular, this constitution should
include the points detailed in the following chapter. Details with regards to the
underlying constitutional concepts can be found in the respective policy
portfolio document, “Provisions for a European Constitution, underlying
constitutional concepts”.
G. Provisions for a European Constitution
1. Constitutional principles
In addition to the six principles guiding its reform of the European Union listed in the
Mapping of Policies—democracy, subsidiarity, efficiency, transparency, clarity, and
11 In either councils, in the current structure of the EU; in the only remaining Council, in Volt’s proposed
structure.
15


ease of citizens’ involvement—Volt subscribes to the following principles for any
constitution of the European Union.
➢Republicanism. Volt supports a republican form of government for European
institutions where the European people, endowed with a common European
citizenship, are the sovereigns and where the rule of law applies to all citizens
equally. This provision is not meant to force a republican model on member
states so long as their institutions are democratic.
➢Representative democracy. Given its attachment to individual liberties, Volt
supports a system of representative democracy, where citizens periodically and
freely elect their representatives to deliberate and decide on legislation.
➢Parliamentary system. In line with a long-standing European tradition and in
order
to
avoid
an
undue
concentration
of
powers,
Volt
supports
a
parliamentary system of government where the Union’s executive stems from
and derives its democratic legitimacy from a majority of the European
Parliament.
➢Federalism. In order to ensure an efficient common government while
respecting the EU’s diversity, Volt supports a federal structure for the Union.
The EU’s federal government and its federated state governments share the
EU’s competences and are endowed with rights as prescribed in the
constitution. While initially based on the EU’s Member States and expected to
remain largely stable, state boundaries may evolve following a constitutional
process involving citizens.
➢Principle of subsidiarity. As far as possible, competences shall be distributed
to the level at which they are best carried out. While cooperation between the
federal and state levels is encouraged, the constitution delegates relevant
responsibilities and accountability to each level. Where appropriate, we further
encourage devolving competences and associated funds to the regional and
local levels, for increased efficacy and the proper expression of Europe's
regional diversity, including where these regions cross state borders.
➢Primacy of federal law. Federal law should have primacy over state law. In the
event of a dispute, the federal judiciary shall decide on the interpretation of
competences and may invalidate specific federal and, in certain cases
prescribed by the Constitution, state laws.
➢Majority
rule. In line with our support for democracy, Volt supports
decision-making processes based on majorities and explicitly opposes the
unanimity principle. Exceptional cases, such as constitutional amendments, may
require a qualified majority as prescribed in the Constitution.
16


2. Individual and collective rights
➢Recognise human rights. Any Constitution for the European Union must
include the recognition and respect of human rights and human rights texts,
including, but not limited to, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the
Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, the European
Convention on Human Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, and the International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights.
These rights shall be inviolable and inalienable.
➢Respect and protect human rights. The respect and protection of human
rights shall be binding on federal and state institutions. Rights may only be
limited in the public interest, as provided for by law and where the principle of
proportionality is met. Individuals who find their rights compromised will have
access to redress through the courts, which must provide fair, effective, and
timely access to justice for all.
3. Institutions
➢Legislature
○
The European Parliament should be the lower house of the legislature. It
shall be directly elected according to “Volt’s Improved Bundestag
Method”, which provides citizens with a vote for a candidate in a local
constituency and another for a European party on a state-wide list.
○
The legislature shall comprise an upper house representing citizens as
members of the states; its members shall be elected by citizens or by the
states’ lower houses. States may be represented equally or with a low
level of proportionality based on the states’ population. The upper
house shall participate in the law-making process and constitutional
amendments.
○
The Constitution shall detail the respective powers of both legislative
houses. Each house shall have significant powers to influence the regular
federal law-making process in a meaningful way and shall have the right
to legislative initiative.
○
In particular, the process for bills to become law shall ensure that both
legislative houses have a proper say, whilst striving to avoid legislative
blockages. In the event of persisting disagreements, a conciliation
committee consisting of members of both houses may be convened.
Should the bill proposed by this committee fail to be adopted,
Parliament, as the direct representative of European citizens, may adopt
the bill using a qualified majority.
17


➢Executive
○
The European Union's President shall be the Head of State. The
President shall be elected by citizens or a body of democratically elected
representatives and act as an overarching figure of unity with mostly
ceremonial powers. The President shall sign bills into law and may refuse
to
do
so
upon
clear
and
expressed
concerns
about
a
bill’s
constitutionality; he may send the bill back to the legislature for review
or request a ruling from the Constitutional Court. The Constitution shall
delineate a process for such cases.
○
A Federal Prime Minister shall be in charge of leading the government’s
political action via a cabinet of Federal Ministers. The Federal Prime
Minister shall be elected by the European Parliament from its ranks. The
European Parliament shall have the right to remove its confidence in the
Federal Prime Minister by agreeing on a new Prime Minister (known as a
"constructive vote of no-confidence"); the exercise of this right may be
suspended for fixed periods following the election of a Prime Minister
and ahead of parliamentary elections.
➢Judiciary
○
The judicial power of the Union shall be vested in a judiciary comprising a
Constitutional Court, a Supreme Court, and lower courts as necessary.
○
The structure of the judiciary and the appointment process of its
members should be based on the values of independence and
accountability. In particular, judges should be protected from undue
political interference.
○
In line with international standards,
an independent, non-political
12
judicial council, comprising judicial and non-judicial members, shall
contribute to federal judicial appointments as well as to additional
administrative, supervisory, or advisory roles. Specific requirements may
apply to the appointment of judges of the Constitutional Court.
○
The
Constitutional
Court should have the power to assess the
constitutionality of federal and state laws. Federal and, in certain cases
prescribed by the Constitution, state laws may be invalidated. The
Supreme Court may be the Constitutional Court or a separate court.
12 These include the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the UN Basic Principles on the
Independence of the Judiciary, and the Minimum Standards of the International Bar Association.
18


4. Competences
A European Constitution should address the distribution of competences, including at
least the following competences.
➢Principle of subsidiarity. Competences should be distributed to the level at
which they are best handled. Cooperation between the Federal and State levels
shall be encouraged. Unless explicitly stated otherwise in the Constitution for
specific competences, the Federal level shall have the power to decide on the
distribution of competences.
➢Exclusive Federal competences. Some responsibilities will be delegated to the
federal level. For example, the Federal government shall have sole authority
over foreign, defence, and monetary policy. The European armed forces shall
be under the responsibility of a European Minister of Defence and under
parliamentary control.
➢Taxation powers. The Federal legislature shall be empowered to directly and
indirectly lay and collect federal taxes, duties, and any other relevant revenue
for the European Union.
➢Constitutional
amendments. Amendments to the Constitution shall be
initiated in a similar process as regular legislation but require the approval of
both houses by a qualified majority as prescribed in the constitution.
➢Amendment of Article 7 TEU, in order to safeguard the values of the EU and
to be able to act against violations, Article 7 TEU needs to be amended. The
procedures of Article 7 TEU must no longer require complete unanimity.
Instead, it should require a two-thirds majority vote at all levels and in all
bodies of the EU. As a nuclear option, paragraphs must be added to Article 7
TEU, enabling the possibility of suspension and exclusion of a member state
from the EU. Even after the suspension or exclusion of a state, groups and
activists supporting the furthering of rule of law principles will receive
continuing financial support.
➢Rule of law mechanism. Volt pushes for the European Treaties to be adapted
in such a way that a future, tightened rule of law mechanism will make cuts in
EU funds to specific Member States possible when the values and agreements
of the European Union are not followed. This is to be done regardless of the
use of EU funds and the type of EU funding, following the example of the EU
19


recovery funds set up in 2020.
Decisions in this strengthened mechanism will
13
be taken by the Commission and confirmed by the European Parliament with an
absolute majority.
➢EU financial projects at the intergovernmental level. EU financial projects
are unlawfully blocked again to prevent decisions on other matters. Volt
encourages nation states to implement financial projects such as the Recovery
Fund outside the Council, which, as an enhanced cooperation, is possible under
EU law. This option is suboptimal and should be a last resort to prevent values
and economic progress from being played off against each other.
13 European Commision, Recovery Plan for Europe, available at:
https://ec.europa.eu/info/strategy/recovery-plan-europe_en
20


III.
Economic and financial reform
A. Vision
Volt envisions a European economic and financial system that benefits all European
citizens and the entire European society. This means that the economic system should
allow citizens to pursue their personal goals while also fully participating in European
society.
Volt believes that we can only thrive as individuals if we respect and contribute to a
community founded on universal values. These values and principles, which include
solidarity, sustainability, equal opportunity, liberty, justice, and human dignity, form
the foundation of our community and must also apply to our economic and financial
systems.
Volt believes that a strong Europe requires fiscal and monetary institutions that are
(1) democratically legitimised, (2) operate in accordance with our shared norms, and
(3) act in the best interests of the Union as a whole. As a result, we envision the
Eurozone's institutional completion, resulting in a better Union for all residents. This
includes the establishment of a European finance ministry, the right of the European
Union to levy taxes, and an increase in the European Union budget to meet the
European Union's new responsibility for European fiscal stabilisation.
It is critical that we empower the European Union and its institutions to address the
fiscal imbalances that we are currently witnessing. To that end, we must fight high
legacy debt and complete the banking union. To that end, we propose a proportional
transfer of debt across member states onto the European Union balance sheet, as
well as a restart of binding fiscal rules, allowing flexibility to spend countercyclically in
recessions.
In terms of its fiscal architecture, we believe in a European Union that remains true to
its identity as a union of solidarity, with each country feeling responsible for the
Union's fate. In this sense, we must recognize that the fiscal policy of each member
state has implications beyond its own borders. Our philosophy is that we want to
reach a point where member countries can orderly restructure their debt in a partial
default without a collapse of social standards for their citizens. To that end, European
automatic stabilisers should be able to alleviate hardship during times of crisis, and
the European Union should be able to act as an emergency insurer to guarantee basic
functions, such as unemployment benefits and civil servant payment, if a state loses
its ability to do so. Because monetary policy and interest rates cannot be tailored to
individual economic conditions in a currency union, the economic setup should
smooth the accumulation of asymmetric shocks.
21


To summarise, while European fiscal governance should always strive to serve all of its
citizens, there must be a social safety net in place to protect the most vulnerable
groups and ensure a minimum living standard.
B. Euro Summit & Eurogroup
With the creation of the European Monetary Union (EMU), the responsibility for
monetary policy was transferred to a new European supranational institution, the
European Central Bank, as a single monetary authority. However, decisions related to
economic policy-making remained in the hands of national governments. This became
particularly evident during the Eurozone crisis, when the Heads of State or
Government and the 18 Ministers of Finance and Economic Affairs served as key
policy-makers. Economic policy-making was mainly done at the intergovernmental
level, excluding the scrutiny of the European Parliament and the involvement of the
Commission or EU Member States outside the Eurozone. Institutional manifestations
are, for example, the Eurogroup and the Euro Summit. The Eurogroup entails informal
meetings of the Eurozone's finance ministers and has played a decisive role in
managing the Euro crisis. The Euro Summit is an informal platform for meetings
between the Heads of State or Government of the Euro area.
➢Provide democratic legitimacy to EU economic policymaking and make it
work for everyone. Volt proposes an economic and financial policy decided by
the European Parliament, with the Council fulfilling the role of co-legislators.
First, finance Ministerial meetings need to be formalised in an entirely
transparent setting in preparation for the transition to a two-chamber federal
system. Informal meetings that lead to EU-wide decisions, in particular
meetings of heads of EU governments, do not align with Volt's vision of a
transparent and democratic European Union. Volt proposes the immediate
abolishment of such meetings and a clear division of powers between the
legislative and executive branches to ensure the realisation of the principles of
democracy and accountability.
C. European Central Bank
The European Central Bank's (ECB) primary objective is to maintain price stability. We
want to give the ECB more leeway in interpreting its mandate in the form of a dual
mandate, which adds the target of full employment to the existing target of price
stability.
With
the
introduction
of
unconventional
monetary
and
targeted
bond-purchasing programs, the ECB's mandate has been dangerously legally
stretched, approaching what could be considered direct state financing. We agree
22


that these measures were most likely necessary to keep the Euro as a currency, but
we believe that, in a healthy European architecture, the ECB mandate should never
have been stretched so far.
➢No government financing. We aim to establish a healthy EU fiscal environment
by reducing high levels of government debt and establishing the possibility of
orderly member state government bankruptcy and debt restructuring without
massive social and humanitarian costs.
➢Monetary Policy should target employment too. For improved monetary
governance, we envision a firmly independent ECB that is empowered with a
dual mandate, that adds targets of full employment, as well as moderate
long-term interest rates to the long-established target of price stability, similar
to the mandate of the US Federal Reserve.
This would require a change of the
14
European Treaty and is thus a long-term project.
D. Fiscal policy in the European Union
We support and welcome EU countries to adopt the Euro as currency as soon as
possible, to raise its standing as a potential world reserve currency. We find
country-specific opt-outs from the Euro to be undesirable and welcome those
member states that are not yet using the Euro with open arms. It is a substantial
problem of the European economic architecture that countries interact in the
common market, and share the same currency, but are not coordinating their fiscal
policies. To alleviate this problem, we propose that the EU take a much larger role in
economic cyclical stabilisation and that it receives the budgetary power to do so and
taxation power to back such a budget.
➢Increase the EU Budget. A larger budget needs to be financed out of newly
introduced discretionary EU taxes. We propose to triple the size of the EU
budget, implying a yearly budget of approximately 1 trillion Euro. This budget
shall have three major uses: (1) it will be used for financial support programs
that are both targeted and countercyclical; (2) it will allow for common
European public goods (such as defence, climate and transnational energy and
digital infrastructure) to be financed at the European level; (3) lastly, it will
serve funding source for automatic stabilisation in times of crises: we propose
to allow for emergency funding at the European level to provide basic services
such as unemployment benefits and payment for public sector workers, in case
a state is incapable of fulfilling these obligations.
14 Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, The Federal Reserve's Dual Mandate, available at
https://www.chicagofed.org/research/dual-mandate/dual-mandate
23


E. European Stability Mechanism
The European Stability Mechanism (ESM) is the Eurozone's bailout fund and a key
mechanism for its stability. It is currently run by national governments and thus works
as an intergovernmental mechanism. Volt supports the ESM becoming an institution
under EU law accountable to the European Parliament. The transformation of the ESM
should respect the following three key aspects:
➢Integrate the ESM into regular EU law. The current form of the ESM is
dysfunctional and undemocratic. Decisions to provide financial assistance to a
member country are not taken by a majority vote but by unanimity and require
prior approval by some national parliaments. The European Parliament in
contrast has no rights in this regard. The governance of the ESM should reflect
common voting procedures in the EU (qualified majority voting) and should
become a full EU body, subject to EU law and fully embedded in EU
accountability mechanisms under the watchful eye of the European Parliament.
In the short term, regarding governance, the ESM board should be composed of
national Finance Ministers as well as Euro area officials appointed by the
European Council and elected by the European Parliament. In the long term,
the ESM should fall under the competency of the EU Finance Minister, who will
be accountable to the European Parliament.
➢The
ESM
shall
develop
transparent
rules
for
national
government
insolvency and support programs. This will allow states to go into bankruptcy,
enter negotiations with their creditors, and begin restructuring their debt
before conditional financial assistance is granted.
F. Creation of an EU Finance Ministry
Currently, executive decisions in Eurozone and EU economic policy-making are being
made in an opaque manner involving the Commission, the Eurogroup and Euro
Summit. Instead of this plethora of competencies, we propose the creation of a
European Economic and Finance Ministry, with the clear role of leading fiscal and
economic policy in Europe.
➢Create a European Finance Ministry. As the first step of economic governance
reform, Volt supports the Commission's proposal to create the role of a
European Minister of Finance. This role will strongly enhance accountability and
transparency in European financial governance. In the short term, with our
current institutional architecture, this Minister would be both a European
commissioner and chair monthly meetings of eurozone finance ministers −the
so-called Eurogroup.
The Minister will have to report to the European
Parliament and represent Europe on the international economy stage, e.g.
24


within the International Monetary Fund. Crucially, the ministerial role would be
of pan-European competence, rather than a Eurozone-only one - a symbol of
our
economic
unity.
The
inclusion
of
non-Euro
countries
under
the
representation of the Minister will have to be subject to their compliance with
proposed fiscal policy reform. In the long term and with the abolishment of the
Eurogroup, the position of the EU Finance Minister will have its own ministerial
staff, guide the implementation of economic and fiscal laws, and contribute to
the policy-making process under the scrutiny of the legislative branch.
G. Complete the European Banking Union
Financing conditions in the European Union differ widely between states. We want to
ensure that an entrepreneur with an innovative idea can access funding under the
same conditions anywhere in Europe. Thus, we deem it necessary that the
long-promised “banking union” is finalised at last. This will involve solving the problem
states and their banking sector being intimately linked through banks holding
significant portions of their own government’s debt, creating a situation where the
failure of either of the two parties can easily lead to the failure of the other. This
vicious dependency of banks and States is often called the "sovereign-bank nexus".
We support the established pillars of the banking union, including the single
supervisory mechanism (SSM) with the ECB as the central prudential supervisor of
credit institutions in the euro area and in non-euro EU countries that choose to join
the SSM. However, the banking Union must be extended further through European
portfolio
insurance,
empowering the European banking supervision, and the
introduction of a European safe asset to break the “sovereign-bank nexus”.
➢Create a fully European banking supervision system. Europe has made
significant progress with respect to banking supervision. The approval of a
Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) allows for a harmonised approach to
regulation, where the ECB and national central banks share responsibility and
labour.
We
strongly
support
further
Europeanisation
of
our
Banking
Supervision, as it creates a level playing field for European banks and increases
financial stability through harmonised rules and increased transparency.
➢Break the sovereign-bank nexus. If a sovereign restructuring regime is to be
credible, then the sovereign-bank nexus must be broken for good. Our primary
proposal to break the dependence of banks on their national sovereign assets
is the creation of European safe assets, which are government debt issued by
the European Union. As this safe asset is backed by one of the biggest and most
productive economic areas in the world, it will be considered as very safe debt.
Crucially, it will be less sensitive to any individual member state’s fiscal
situation. Our proposed means of creating a sufficient amount of these assets
25


is for the European Union to issue debt to proportionally take over a share of
debt of the member states, as described below.
➢Concentration charges for holding national assets. In the absence of a safe
asset we propose the introduction of concentration risk charges for sovereign
exposures to reduce contagion from States to banks. Banks would be
incentivised to diversify their sovereign bond portfolios. Introducing capital
charges for concentrations to sovereigns will incentivise a diversification of
banks' sovereign portfolios across the Eurozone Member States. This allows for
risk-sharing and orderly default, if necessary.
➢Create EU-wide deposit insurance. A European Deposit Insurance will add to
breaking the sovereign-bank nexus. This is because the risk of bank runs is no
longer dependent on the solvency of the sovereign that provides the deposit
insurance. Such a Europeanisation of deposit insurance consequently reduces
the likelihood of bank runs and thereby increases financial stability. Regulatory
measures shall ensure that additional deposit insurance does not lead to
increased risk taking by banks.
H. Fighting Excessive Debt with European Fiscal Rules
High government debt levels in some countries have proven one of the most
prevalent roadblocks to European integration, and the problem is very unlikely to
disappear on its own. Our proposal is for the European Union to issue its own debt,
and take over a portion of its member states’ debt to achieve a manageable debt level
once again. In return, new and binding fiscal rules shall be agreed upon and states
adhering to such rules shall see further debt relief.
➢Debt Transfer. We propose that the EU issues debt and uses it to purchase and
retire proportionally debt of all EU member states. In return, member states
pass laws of constitutional status to adhere to new and binding fiscal rules that
will prevent debt levels of this magnitude from arising ever again. Such a debt
transfer does not make the debt disappear, but it is now backed by a much
larger and more credible creditor who can issue debt itself to finance the
purchase, which will serve as an asset of safe status for the world economy. The
EU can sustain much higher debt levels than individual countries that might
easily fall into financial distress and thus can work productively to decrease
European legacy debt back towards a reasonable level. As states credibly put
themselves on a path towards more sustainable debt levels, there shall be an
26


incentive scheme of further debt relief through the EU.
➢New Fiscal Rules for the Eurozone. The Stability and Growth Pact proved to
be ineffective at preventing the buildup of unsustainable debt levels. The pact
is too inflexible to allow for strong countercyclical policies, and its rules
prevent necessary smart and sustainable investment across Europe and lead to
unnecessary and harmful reductions in public service provisions. This stifles
economic growth, leading to social and political instability, distrust, and
alienation. We propose transparent fiscal rules that incentivise prudent fiscal
policies and the reduction of unsustainable debt levels but allow for flexibility
in counteracting macroeconomic shocks. In a crisis, deficits may be much higher
(we have seen necessary and temporary deficit spending during the Covid crisis
of around 10% of GDP), but any large deficit above must be balanced by a
corresponding net surplus after the crisis has passed. Generally, as the EU
should assume a larger role in fiscal stabilisation, high national deficits beyond
the working of automatic stabilisers in the budget may not even be necessary
during a recession.
➢No bailouts. Through the aforementioned mechanisms (European Debt, ESM,
fiscal rules, currency stability), we are assured not to find ourselves in a
situation again in which member states have to bail each other out, as even in
distressed member states countercyclical spending and social services will be
guaranteed. There will be no bailouts, but orderly procedures on how to steer
distressed member states back to a functioning fiscal environment.
27


IV.
Justice & Home Affairs
A. Vision
Volt wants a Europe that ensures citizens’ rights are respected throughout the Union.
Citizens must be able to participate fully in the democratic process. This includes the
right to vote for and stand as a candidate wherever they are registered as a resident,
be it in local, regional, national, or European elections. Citizens must not be
discriminated against on the basis of their nationality, sex, racial or ethnic origin,
religion or belief, disability, age, or sexual orientation.
Volt wants a Europe in which citizens are able to move and reside freely. This is one of
the four pillars on which European integration rests, and it is essential for a
prosperous, free, and inclusive European society. To guarantee free movement
internally, external borders need to be managed more effectively, efficiently, and
humanely. This is a common challenge that should not be left to individual states, but
one that Europe should take on as a community, respecting the common principle of
solidarity.
Volt wants a Europe whose Member States adhere to the principles of democracy and
the rule of law, building on the European Treaties and the Charter of Fundamental
Rights. These principles are the bedrock of the political community: both aspiring and
current Member States need to fully respect them, and if they are violated, Europe
must have the power to restore them.
Volt wants a Europe that protects its citizens and makes them feel secure. Europe
needs more than just police cooperation and intelligence sharing between member
states; it needs its own capacities and legal competence to safeguard the security of
its people. This is much more important than the sensitivities and prestige of national
elites. At the same time, threat perceptions by political leaders should not be
exaggerated; the level of objective security is unprecedented in European history, and
it is the responsibility of political actors to act on objective facts and not exaggerate
threats to pursue their own political agendas.
B. Border protection
The protection of European borders should become an exclusive competence of the
European Union. Current national border protection should be integrated into a
coherent and efficient European border protection system. The EU needs a political
community that supports all its Member States when necessary to protect common
borders. Volt believes we must insist on a political community that ensures human
rights are upheld throughout its jurisdiction, including on its borders and beyond.
28


A functional protection of the EU border is a prerequisite for the free movement of
people within the EU. Therefore, we want to create and support a system that
upholds the integrity of EU borders, fights cross-border crime, and ensures the safety
of European residents. We want an EU border protection system that provides initial
reception of asylum seekers in an orderly and humane way, upholds European values,
and makes sure that first points of contact with refugees exemplify what European
citizens stand for.
➢Develop the capacities of a fully operational European border protection
agency. Volt supports developing the European Border and Coast Guard
Agency from an intergovernmental agency that largely coordinates national
services to an integrated European agency with a full mandate and the
capabilities to act and react. The European agency will be staffed with its own
border guards and equipment through new funds from the EU budget, to act
independently of Member States’ contributions. Initially, it will conduct joint
training for national border guards. Later, this will develop to integrate national
structures into the European agency in order to avoid the inefficiencies that
come from duplication.
➢Ensure European Parliamentary scrutiny. Competencies and budgets need to
be clarified between EU institutions and Member States in order to increase
transparency while ensuring that mixed accountabilities between national and
European parliaments are a thing of the past. Ultimately, there needs to be
clear parliamentary control by the European Parliament of the European
Border and Coast Guard Agency and the future European border protection
agency.
➢Ensure the protection of core values at our borders. The protection of our
borders goes hand in hand with the protection of our shared values. It is here
that people from all over the world get their first impression of Europe. Their
aspirations for building a better life in Europe must be encouraged by how we
welcome them; they must always be treated with respect and dignity, as well as
with respect to the rule of law. Therefore, the European Charter of
Fundamental Rights should be a guidepost for the agency, incorporated into its
mission statement, compliance system, and accountability to the European
Parliament. The disruption of human smuggling and trafficking networks
should always go hand in hand with search and rescue operations as well as
welcoming operations for asylum seekers and refugees.
➢The ongoing intra-Schengen border controls should stop as soon as we have
a functioning external EU border. The personnel involved in controlling
intra-Schengen borders should instead be deployed to external borders,
including internal entry points (e.g. international airports), on a rotating basis,
with extra compensation for being far away from home. Countries without an
external border should commit a quota of personnel to the external border
29


based on their population size. Where this turns out not to be feasible,
countries should provide extra funding for the protection of the external
border instead.
C. European police, intelligence, and cyber security
Volt supports the unification of national police, intelligence, and cyber security
services across Europe, starting with automatic information-sharing to identify and
address cross-border crimes and threats. As the EU’s law enforcement agency,
Europol’s competences in these areas should be gradually extended, its capabilities
strengthened, and it should be brought under tighter parliamentary oversight. In the
long term, the agency should develop into the EU’s federal-level police department.
➢Extend
Europol’s
competences.
Cooperation between European police
agencies on information sharing should be strengthened. There should be
more binding mechanisms for sharing information that is vital for combating
cross-border crime, terrorism and cyber security threats. Europol’s direct access
to relevant information from Member States’ police forces should be
considered. In the long run, Europol should be given exclusive authority to
combat cross-border crime, terrorism, and cyber security threats.
➢Build up Europol’s capabilities. Europol’s independent operative capabilities
should be strengthened gradually. First and foremost, developing cyber
security capabilities must be prioritised; Member States' resources should be
directed toward developing common European cyber security capabilities
rather than national cyber security agencies. Capabilities should also be
developed to support each Member State’s fight against cross-border crime
and terrorism. This would be the basis for an independent federal-level
operative capability.
➢Strengthen European parliamentary oversight. As Europol’s competences
and
capabilities
are
expanded,
its
democratic
accountability
must
be
strengthened. There should be a committee to account for Europol’s
operations, as well as a commissioner in charge of Europol. Interior ministers of
the Member States should be involved in this process as well, especially with
regard to cooperation between national police services.
➢Establish a European Guard to close the gap in the internal security
architecture. New threats like military-style terrorism or large-scale natural
disasters are borderless and bring our current security authorities to their
limits in manpower and competence. In order to cope with these challenges, we
need a new security agency, a European Guard, which will support national and
local forces by performing civilian, police, and partly military tasks. This guard
will consist of reservists and can be requested by any Member State to assist
30


local security forces, including stepping in after terrorist attacks to ensure
public order and protect strategically important and representative facilities
and places. It will also help in the event of natural disasters, such as floods,
earthquakes, forest fires, or epidemics, with equipment, coordination, and
manpower. Furthermore, this European Guard can carry out representative
tasks such as honouring state visits on a European scale. National equivalents,
such as the newly-formed French National Guard, should be merged into this
European Guard.
D. Migration and refugee policy
Volt believes that we need a common EU Migration and Refugee Policy to define a
unified approach to manage inward migration and refugee flows. Member States
need to take major steps towards a common system to handle applications and
appeals, resettle migrants among Member States, and return rejected applicants to
their countries of origin. But there is more scope for the EU to use its leverage to sign
readmission agreements with countries of origin
or to support Member States in
brokering readmission agreements. The EU can also deploy a wide range of incentives
to secure readmission agreements, from visa policies to bilateral aid.
This common policy approach should operate as part of a larger framework for
international cooperation on the prevention and mitigation of refugee crises. This is
why the Dublin system needs to be reformed and a new settlement system defined,
for instance, based on population, population density, wealth, age, and growth. The
amended system should provide for penalties for contravening countries.
1. Abiding by the UN Refugee Convention
A common EU asylum agreement must include binding mechanisms to ensure that all
EU Member States follow the provisions of the UN Refugee Convention.
This
15
includes:16
➢Work together with the developing world, which is hosting more than 80% of
the world’s refugees,
to reform the international refugee system.
17
➢Anticipate future refugee movements. It is necessary for the EU to not simply
respond to but also plan for refugee movements.
○
Put aside a budget for refugee protection every year, even when there is
no refugee movement. In the long term, it will definitely be necessary to
17 UNHCR, Global Trends: Forced Displacement in 2016, available at http://www.unhcr.org/5943e8a34
16 Open Global Rights, A global solution to a global refugee crisis, available at
https://www.openglobalrights.org/global-solution-to-global-refugee-crisis/
15 UNHCR, Convention and Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees, available at
http://www.unhcr.org/3b66c2aa10
31


have this because, for example, of the rising number of climate refugees
the EU will have to process.
○
Identify, invent, and register possible accommodation for future refugee
flows. The EU should have an accessible database of housing where
refugees can stay for five to seven years to ensure continuous
protection.
○
Create burden-sharing allocations in advance of refugee movements.
Volt advocates quotas for Member States to allocate refugees.
➢Strengthen cooperation with UNHCR. The EU must increase its support for
UNHCR and create increased synergies between its own refugee management
frameworks and the work of UNHCR.
2. Principle of country of first arrival
➢Immediately abolish the "Dublin principle" which says refugees must apply
for asylum in their first EU country of arrival. A burden-sharing settlement
system must replace it.
3. Other provisions
➢Empower the European Asylum Support Office to be the primary centre for
decision-making
on
asylum
issues
across
the
EU
and achieve EASO’s
transformation into a full-fledged Agency for Asylum, as proposed in 2016 by
the European Commission. Additionally, the EASO should offer more training
for asylum officers to ensure a more humane treatment of refugees.18
➢Ensure that asylum seekers’ and refugees’ rights are respected and that
countries uphold their obligations arising out of international treaties.
○
Put an end to the practice of detaining asylum seekers and refugees (on
Greek islands, in Hungary, etc.) and work on an alternative solution.19
➢Continue the practice of protecting refugees for the duration of the risk.20
However, offer permanent residence to refugees after a certain period if they
are still at risk (five to seven years) when certain criteria are met.
However,
21
refugees should always be encouraged and supported to return to their home
countries, if they are safe, to be part of the rebuilding efforts. Immediate
21 For example: clean track record, language skills, and knowledge of key elements of the country.
20 See more details at Migration
19 Asylum in Europe, Boundaries of liberty: Asylum and de facto detention in Europe, available at
http://www.asylumineurope.org/sites/default/files/shadow-reports/boundariesliberty.pdf; Human
Rights Watch, Greece: 13,000 Still Trapped on Islands, available at
https://www.hrw.org/news/2018/03/06/greece-13000-still-trapped-islands
18 The continuing failure of the Common European Asylum System, available at
http://thomasspijkerboer.eu/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/den-heijer-rijpma-spijkerboer-CMLR-def.pdf
32


permanent integration, however, is required for certain types of refugees, such
as unaccompanied minors or refugees with severe trauma from, for example, a
conflict situation.
➢Strengthen legal channels for migration. The EU needs to strengthen its legal
channels for migration through visa programmes, scholarships, and work
permits to avoid readmission agreements, which will in any case be struck only
if the EU provides additional development funding to source countries. EU aid
could be paid in instalments, and returns could be limited to future arrivals
only, so that states would not have to worry about a sudden spike in returns
when people that are already in Europe are sent back to their country of origin.
➢Establish a long-term strategy. The EU needs a long-term strategy to reduce
incentives to migrate. In the long run, migration can only be reduced by
ensuring security and economic opportunities in the countries of origin. But the
number of people attempting to reach Europe will continue to increase as long
as Europe has an image as a safer and wealthier region than the countries from
which migration is originating.
33


V.
Foreign and Neighbourhood Policy Reform
A. Vision
Volt believes that European integration is one of the biggest achievements in
international politics in the 20th century. However, the ongoing destabilisation of the
global order calls for a far more proactive and coherent EU foreign policy. Our vision is
that of an outward-looking Europe that plays a constructive and stabilising role in the
world and does not shirk responsibility but uses its political and economic weight to
stand up for multilateralism, peaceful conflict resolution, and a coordinated response
to global challenges such as nuclear proliferation, climate change, or economic
imbalances. The EU should tell its success story of integration and achieving peace
and prosperity after centuries of conflict to promote integration and diffuse tensions
in other parts of the world. Europe must be an example of how former enemies can
become friends and partners in a common project
and of how democracy can be
organised beyond the nation-state for the benefit of citizens. The EU should
encourage the replication of its success elsewhere through the promotion of regional
integration across the world and support for multilateral institutions, most notably
the United Nations. At the same time, the EU must recognise that some challenges,
including those in its own neighbourhood, cannot be solved in the short term or by
the EU alone. Volt thus supports the adoption of a two-pronged approach to increase
its capacity to withstand crises it cannot solve in the foreseeable future
while
working within multilateral institutions and with key partners towards a solution to
these crises in the longer term.
Apart from supporting multilateral institutions, the EU should also seek to engage
bilaterally with key partners around the globe. For this, the European External Action
Service (EEAS) should be strengthened and EU representations around the world
should be transformed into EU embassies. Furthermore, the EU needs to step up its
efforts to stabilise and integrate its immediate neighbourhood.
B. EU Institutional Capacity-Reform of the EEAS
➢Adopt a common foreign policy through a bolstered EEAS. In the longer
term, Volt calls for foreign policy (as trade policy before it) to become an
exclusive EU competence. This new EU competence will be managed by a
strengthened External Action Service (EEAS). EU delegations must become EU
embassies, be extended wherever necessary, and replace Member States’
embassies. However, member states may retain representation to further their
interests. The guiding principles of this new EEAS's work will be to uphold and
promote the above-mentioned European values and interests and to support
the global implementation of development agendas, including the global
Agenda 2030 and its Sustainable Development Goals. Consequently, EU
34


representation will replace member-State representations in all international
fora, including through a single UN ambassador.
➢Strengthen the role of the European Parliament in matters of EU foreign
policy. Volt calls on the European Parliament to decide on all cases of political
and economic sanctions, including trade embargoes, imposed by the EU on
third countries or individuals. This would help make the EU’s foreign policy
more democratic, making it easier for Member States to transfer powers in this
area to the European level and to make Parliament the forum for debates on
Europe’s role in the world, thus raising its visibility and profile.
C. EU
relationships
with
the
United Nations and other
multilateral institutions
Highly connected to the rest of the world, Europe is also highly exposed to its
lingering problems. Europe therefore stands to directly benefit from multilateral
action in favour of increased development and a greater respect for human rights, in
particular in the least developed countries.
The United Nations, through its work on the peaceful resolution of disputes,
humanitarian aid, development, and global health, is the cornerstone of the
international system. Volt shares and supports its values of peace, justice, human
rights, and shared prosperity. It is by far the most legitimate actor for global action,
with nearly universal membership. Yet, we are not blind to its shortcomings and the
limitations triggered by its organisational set-up and financing mechanism. Volt
therefore supports reform efforts that better enable the United Nations to fulfil its
ambitious mandate and give it the tools to act more decisively and more efficiently. As
supporters of democracy, Volt also believes that no transfer of power should take
place without ensuring democratic control of those powers. Volt therefore supports
increased democratic control of the UN by its member states.
Likewise, Volt supports cooperation and multilateral action in other fora, from
development and economic governance with the various “G” formats, the OECD,
regional organisations, and international financial institutions, to security cooperation
with the OSCE, NATO, and other ad-hoc fora with like-minded countries.
1. Relationship with the United Nations
➢Honour
and
strengthen
commitments
to
the
United
Nations.
As a
trustworthy and rule-bound global player, the EU must uphold its financial
commitments to the UN regular budget and support efforts to increase this
budget. Volt calls for an increase in voluntary contributions to the UN and its
agencies, funds, and programmes, with particular attention given to increasing
the share of its non-earmarked contributions. Volt encourages all UN Member
35


States to act likewise. Volt also supports increases in in-kind contributions as
well as support for peacekeeping missions through funding, training, and
contributions of civilian and military personnel.
➢Take pragmatic steps for an improved Security Council in the short-term. As
long as fundamental reforms to the UNSC have not been implemented,
pragmatic reforms must be pursued to make the Security Council more
effective in the short term. For instance, as other countries have already
proposed, Volt supports suspending the right of veto in cases of human rights
violations and humanitarian emergencies. Moreover, for more transparency and
accountability, Volt proposes that, whenever permanent members vote down a
resolution, they are required to publicly state their reasons for doing so,
underlining how their decision aligns with the purposes and principles of the
Charter, in accordance with which the Security Council and its members are
bound to act.
In cases where the Council fails to uphold international peace
22
and security, Volt supports the General Assembly stepping in, according to its
“Uniting for Peace” Resolution,
and ensuring that remedial action is taken.
23
Finally, Volt calls for Security Council meetings to be more open to
non-members, who should be provided an opportunity to speak on issues
relevant
to
them,
including
Troop-Contributing
Countries
and
non-governmental organisations.
➢Increase democratic representation through a Parliamentary Assembly. The
current General Assembly comprises government appointees representing the
interests of member states. In addition, Volt calls for the creation of a
democratically-elected
Parliamentary
Assembly
(UNPA),
composed
of
directly-elected representatives of citizens around the world. The UNPA’s
competence,
rooted
in
the
principles
of
subsidiarity
and
democracy
everywhere, will be expanded over time as its democratic legitimacy increases.
In the long run, Volt wishes to see the UNPA as a world parliament, adopting
universally binding regulations. Volt therefore strongly supports the “Campaign
for a United Nations Parliamentary Assembly”.24
➢Fundamentally reform the UN Security Council. The Security Council’s
structure is outdated and no longer suited to the UN’s mission of maintaining
international peace and security. Volt calls for strengthening the effectiveness
and democratic legitimacy of the Security Council. In particular, Volt supports
abolishing the status of permanent membership
together with the right of
veto, which run against the principles of equality and democracy. Conversely,
Volt opposes the addition of new countries as permanent Council members, as
24 UNPA Campaign, Giving the World’s Citizens a voice, available at https://en.unpacampaign.org/
23 UN General Assembly Resolution 377, 1950, available at
http://www.un.org/en/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/377(V)
22 UN Charter, Chapter V, Art. 24, para. 2, available at
https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Charter_of_the_United_Nations#Article_24
36


this would only make a deadlock more likely. Volt urges EU member states to
forego seeking permanent membership in the UN Security Council. Instead,
with the UK’s departure from the EU and as long as the status of permanent
membership of the Security Council has not been abandoned, Volt calls on
France to cede its permanent seat in the Security Council to the European
Union, along with the creation of a single EU ambassador to the UN. These
reforms are crucial to revitalising the UN and doing away with gridlock and
inaction; they are also essential to strengthening legitimacy and regaining
popular support for the organisation. However, UNSC Resolutions legitimising
military action should be carried out with broad support; Volt therefore
supports the introduction of a qualified majority for such a resolution following
the abolition of the veto right. Members of the UN Security Council must have
equal voting rights. In order to boost democratic legitimacy and accountability,
Volt supports, in the short term, the election of Council members for a
renewable term by the General Assembly
and, in the long term, by a UN
Parliamentary Assembly. A reformed quota system will ensure regional
representation in the Council.
2. Relationship with other multilateral institutions
➢Increase support for regional and global multilateral institutions. In line
with our commitment to multilateralism, Volt encourages the Commission,
through EEAS, to step up its engagement with other regional blocs, including
the African Union and ASEAN, and support their strengthening. This should
concern political, social, economic, security, and environmental cooperation. In
order to strengthen multilateralism, Volt also calls for increased support for
international institutions and,therefore, includes the World Trade Organisation,
the International Criminal Court, and UN entities
and civil society. The
European Investment Bank must scale up its activities abroad in support of the
EU’s external policy objectives, including to support international security,
promote international cooperation, and develop and consolidate democracy,
the rule of law, and human rights globally. These increased investments are a
way to strengthen the EU’s soft power and, therefore, our ability to spread our
values. Taken together, these measures aim at strengthening multilateral
institutions and promoting democracy at all levels, in accordance with our core
values and the principles of the UN Charter.
➢Support global non-proliferation and disarmament efforts. The massive
presence and availability of both weapons of mass destruction and small arms
and light weapons fuel conflicts worldwide, in particular in the world’s poorest
regions. Volt calls on the EU to step up its support for the Arms Trade Treaty
and other disarmament treaties and actively contribute to their strengthening
through measures including, but not limited to, tighter controls and monitoring
of production, trade, and possession. Volt also fully supports efforts to
strengthen international treaties and conventions, including, but not limited to,
37


the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, the Chemical Weapons Convention, the
Biological
Weapons
Convention,
Nuclear-Free
Zones,
and
relevant
UN
Resolutions, in order to achieve both non-proliferation and active disarmament
of
weapons
of
mass
destruction.
In
particular,
Volt
underlines
that
non-proliferation is not an alternative to disarmament and that nuclear states,
under the NPT, have already committed to disarming. Disrupting decades of
passive practice and understanding the cost and unacceptable danger of
nuclear weapons, Volt calls on EU Member States themselves to lead the
fulfilment of these commitments.
➢Invest in cross-border exchanges of youth, work placements, academics,
and science with third countries. Volt supports significant increases in EU
exchange programmes and links around the world to strengthen global
cooperation
and
mutual
understanding
and promote a people-centred
approach
to
globalisation.
Youth
programmes, such as Erasmus+, and
collaboration with third-country organisations and individuals under the
completion of the Horizon 2020 research framework programme must be
continued, simplified and scaled up to include more participants from third
countries.
➢Act as one on the international scene. In line with our call for foreign policy to
become a competence of the Commission and our proposal to have one EU
ambassador to the United Nations, Volt calls on the EU to act as one
and,
therefore, to seat as one in all international fora. Economic, development, and
cooperation institutions such as the G7, G20, OECD, international financial
institutions, and so on, as well as security organisations such as the OSCE and
NATO, are included. Furthermore, Volt supports the extension of the network
of EU delegations to all countries the EU has diplomatic relationships with, as
well as their strengthening, as an incentive for EU Member States to pool their
resources in one location. Over time, Volt supports the transformation of EU
delegations into EU embassies, which would replace most Member State
embassies throughout the world.
D. Smart Power
We want to launch the concept of "smart power". Essentially, it is about the
balancing of hard and soft power. Certainly, the EU’s biggest contribution to the
world scene so far has been its soft power, but its main weakness remains its lack
of hard power. To avoid the historic mistakes of other superpowers, it is important
that we strike a balance between hard and soft approaches to international
relations. We must be vocal in supporting what is right. We must not yield to
international bullying, and certainly, we must never be warmongers or gung-ho
38


interventionists. Peace and stability are a priority, as is the minimising of
international suffering. With that in mind, we strive to retain the soft power profile
that has become the EU’s trademark, while consciously and strategically developing
the EU’s hard power capabilities.
It should also be highlighted that the EU’s famed soft power is insufficient in itself
as well. The EU must distil and crystallise its ability to be one foreign policy actor,
with all the necessary tools provided to it.
E. EU neighbourhood policy
Volt supports the principle of “more-for-more conditionality”. According to this
concept, Volt encourages closer ties with its neighbourhood, but conditions these ties
on concrete reforms in line with the EU’s standards and values: more proximity for
more reforms. Volt encourages independent governance and democratisation
reforms in the EU’s neighbourhood, including through reduced dependence on
foreign powers. In particular, Volt outlines five core elements: the promotion of our
values (human rights, democracy, and the rule of law), energy security, trade and
economic growth, migration, and crisis and conflict management.
As it does more broadly through its foreign policy, Volt calls on the EU to promote its
values in neighbouring states and encourage them to pursue the democratic reforms
necessary for accession to the Union. Beyond the issue of values, it is also in the EU’s
own interests to be surrounded by stable democracies governed by the rule of law.
Human rights violations must be strongly condemned and be considered a red line for
accession to the EU.
Volt urges a rapid reduction of the EU's reliance on non-renewable energy, especially
oil and gas. In light of the Russian aggression against Ukraine and the resulting
destabilisation of global supply lines, dependence on fossil fuels has become a threat
not only to the environment but also to the strategic independence of the EU and its
immediate neighbourhood. A core objective is the successful implementation of the
European Parliament’s 2008 “20/20/20” plan, which focuses on an energy transition
from fossil fuels to renewables and on the creation of a single energy market (the
Energy Union). This measure would prevent foreign energy providers from pitting
Member States against each other for cheap prices.
Similarly, Volt advocates for the
25
EU to help achieve a reduction in the dependency on foreign energy suppliers in
future member states and other neighbouring countries.
Trade
and
economic
integration
should
be
further
encouraged
in
the
neighbourhood. Volt aims at extending Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Areas
(DCFTAs) to other parts of the neighborhood as a means to bring those countries
25 The New Geopolitics of Natural Gas, pg 150-151, Agnia Grigas
39


closer to the EU’s standards in terms of food quality, economic diversification, and the
rule of law.
Migration is a key factor to consider. In the Southern Neighbourhood, this mainly
takes the form of migration across the Mediterranean through human trafficking; in
the Eastern Partnership and Western Balkans, the main subject of interest here is visa
liberalisation. As proposed in more detail later, Volt supports using visa liberalisation
as a soft power instrument in their Neighbourhood Policy.
The many crises and conflicts in Europe’s neighbourhood need to be treated
purposefully and individually. The EU should try to act as an intermediary in conflict
resolution if requested by neighbourhood countries, and, in that case, support
mediation efforts between all parties involved and foster dialogue between them.
1. Western Balkan integration
➢Continue the EU accession negotiations that were already launched. Volt
supports continuing the existing efforts for access by Western Balkan
countries; new candidates should be admitted as soon as appropriate.
Accession should remain conditional on meeting the rule of law and democratic
standards. However, Volt calls for negotiations to start with the necessary
judicial reforms rather than postponing them to the end of the accession
process, as was the case in previous negotiations.26
➢Implement measures to combat corruption. In line with our strong stance on
the rule of law and transparency, Volt supports strong penalties for corruption
or soliciting bribes, as well as the introduction of digital tools for certain
services to limit the possibility of bribery and corruption. Such measures must
be a prerequisite for accession to the Union in order to ensure transparent and
accountable governance. The Western Balkan States need to be encouraged to
tackle the problems of corruption and organised crime, especially in relation to
drug and weapons trafficking.
Volt also supports increased contacts and
27
working partnerships between Western Balkan law enforcement agencies and
Member States, in order to intercept illegal traffic flows and strengthen the
rule of law.
27 Transparency International, Corruption Perceptions Index 2017, available at
https://www.transparency.org/news/feature/corruption_perceptions_index_2017. CIA, World
Factbook: Albania and Serbia, available at
https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/al.html and
https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/ri.html
26 International Monetary Fund, Reforming the Judiciary: Learning from the Experience of Central,
Eastern and Southeastern Europe, available at
https://www.imf.org/~/media/Files/Publications/REO/EUR/2017/November/eur-reo-chapter-2.ashx?la=
en The IMF uses the example of Romania, where emphasis was made on facilitating foreign investment
and attempts to reform the judiciary were resisted. Serbia's approach to judicial reform is also
considered flawed and incomplete.
40


➢Support the resolution of ongoing border disputes. Border disputes mainly
occur between the Western Balkan States themselves, while only some of them
involve EU Member States, such as disputes between Croatia and Montenegro
over the Prevlaka peninsula and between Croatia and Serbia over land along
the Danube.
Volt encourages the use of mediation or arbitration mechanisms,
28
either through EU institutions or through the Permanent Court of Arbitration.
➢Encourage reconciliation between ethnic groups. Ethnic tensions remain a
serious issue in the Balkans and must be resolved. Whenever possible, Volt calls
for the EU to act as an intermediary to permanently diffuse tensions. Certain
countries, in particular Bosnia-Herzegovina and North Macedonia, continue to
experience worrying tensions. This should be monitored by the EU during the
accession negotiations and their peaceful solution needs to be a hard
requirement for accession.
2. Eastern Partnership
➢Actively apply more-for-more conditionality. Volt encourages increased
cooperation for countries seeking to implement reforms in line with EU values,
such as Moldova and Georgia. Accordingly, each reform bringing a positive
impact should be met with more openness and support from the EU.
➢Resort to less-for-less conditionality. Volt, on the other hand, advocates
limiting cooperation with countries that are moving toward authoritarian rule,
such as Azerbaijan and Belarus. Reforms moving away from democracy and the
rule of law should be met with less openness and support from the EU.
Meanwhile, Volt calls for continued support for civil society groups calling for
democratisation.
➢Encourage Eastern Partnership countries to invest in renewable sources of
energy. Volt promotes the expansion of renewable energy sources and the
diversification of providers of oil and gas, in line with the EU’s environmental
policy and the aim of energy independence. Building on the EU’s own success in
promoting renewable energy at home, Volt supports infrastructure projects for
renewable energy as a part of more-for-more conditionality and a global
renewable energy transition.
28 European Western Balkans, Serbia-BiH border demarcation: A contentious matter?, available at
https://europeanwesternbalkans.com/2017/11/03/serbia-bosnia-border-demarcation-contentious-matt
er/-;
Balkan Insight, Border Disputes Still Bedevil Ex-Yugoslav States, available at
http://www.balkaninsight.com/en/article/border-disputes-still-bedevil-most-ex-yugoslav-states-07-01-2
017-1
41


➢Continue the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Areas (DCFTA). Volt
supports DCFTAs with Moldova,
Georgia,
and Ukraine
and their deepening
29
30
31
whenever possible. Volt also calls for pursuing Association Agreements and
trade integration with Azerbaijan and Armenia, should these countries be
interested and meet existing requirements.
➢Use visa liberalisation in limited cases. In line with the “more for more”
approach, Volt supports the use of a visa liberalisation agreement as a reward
for democratisation reforms.32
3. Southern Neighbourhood
➢Support preparations for DCFTAs with Southern Neighbourhood countries.
Volt supports DCFTAs with the EU’s Southern Neighbourhood, should these
countries first fulfil the requirements to strike an Association Agreement. In
particular, Tunisia is the closest to fulfilling the requirements; as such, after
continued reforms and should Tunisia so desire, Volt supports the creation of a
DCFTA with this country, which could be a model for future agreements.
➢Continue and deepen mobility partnerships. Likewise, Volt supports an
increased mobility partnership with Tunisia
on the basis of more-for-more
conditionality. Mobility partnerships with Morocco and Jordan should be
viewed on the same principle.33
➢Encourage local multilateralism. Volt encourages continued cooperation
through multilateral approaches and calls for an increased role for the Union
for the Mediterranean and the Southern Mediterranean Civil Society Forum.
4. Bilateral relations with Türkiye (Turkey)
➢Continue the strong partnership. Volt supports the partnership between the
EU and Turkey, building on their already high economic integration and
strengthening political and civil society links.
33 The Economist Intelligence Unit classified Morocco as a “hybrid regime”, Jordan as an “authoritarian
regime” and Tunisia as a “flawed democracy.” See The Economist,  Democracy Index 2017, available at
http://pages.eiu.com/rs/753-RIQ-438/images/Democracy_Index_2017.pdf.
32 Cambridge Review of International Affairs, 29:4 (2016), pp.1259-1278, Visa liberalization processes in
the EU’s Eastern neighbourhood: understanding policy outcomes, available at
https://doi.org/10.1080/09557571.2016.1233936
31 Official Journal of the European Union, Association Agreement with Ukraine, available at
http://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/docs/2016/november/tradoc_155103.pdf
30 Official Journal of the European Union, Association Agreement with Georgia, available at
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:22014A0830(02)&from=EN
29 Official Journal of the European Union, Association Agreement with the Republic of Moldova,
available at
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:22014A0830%2801%29&from=EN
42


➢Clearly voice concerns. In line with its principles, Volt raises concerns about
the human rights and political situation in Turkey and actively supports those
who stand for the rule of law, democracy, and human rights.
F. EU China Policy
1. Human Rights
Volt acknowledges that human rights are universal and inalienable, indivisible,
interdependent and interrelated. Everyone is born with and possesses the same
rights, regardless of where they live, their gender or race, or their
religious,
cultural or ethnic background.
Volt refutes the alleged contradiction
between
34
economic and political rights and rejects the argument that governments can limit
human rights based on national sovereignty.
Therefore, Europe should:
➢Consider the safety and the rights of its citizens abroad as a top priority
and, if
necessary, use diplomatic as well as economic pressure to force
foreign
governments to respect the legal protection EU nationals enjoy
under  international law.35
➢Set up a targeted sanctions regime with which it can sanction human rights
offenders by freezing their assets and banning said offenders and their
associates that benefit from these human rights violations from entering the
EU.36
➢Collaborate with the Chinese government to promote human rights that
the CCP considers less controversial, including gender rights and economic
rights.
➢Provide a platform where victims of human rights abuses can speak out
and find support for their pursuit of justice.
36 Targets of sanctions may include individuals, businesses and governmental organisations. Inspiration can be
drawn from the US Magnitsky Act, https://www.state.gov/global-magnitsky-act/
35 Diplomatic pressure includes but is not limited to the expulsion of diplomats and the suspension of
collaboration and/or dialogue. Economic pressure includes targeted sanctions and restricting state-owned
enterprises of the respective government access to the EU market.
34 https://www.unfpa.org/resources/human-rights-principles
43


➢In response to the situation in Hong Kong:
○
Impose restrictive measures on persons and organisations that endanger
the liberties of the people of Hong Kong.
○
Work with the United Kingdom in seeking legal redress against the PRC
government.
○
Refrain from extraditing individuals to Hong Kong when the request
might be politically motivated or when extradition might lead to a
violation of the suspect’s human rights.
○
Offer Hong Kong citizens easy ways to settle down in Europe.
➢Use its diplomatic and economic leverage to push back against any
attempts by the PRC or other states to undermine the universality of human
rights.
2. Climate
In order to fight climate change more effectively, Volt calls on the Chinese
government to peak its emissions before 2030 and achieve net climate neutrality
by 2050, in line with the EU’s ambition. Both sides should cooperate on these
issues.
➢Volt calls on the EU to apply a carbon tax on products imported from
China and other non-EU countries.
➢Volt supports continued and expanded cooperation with China on climate
change, renewable energy, the circular economy, sustainable mobility and
environmental technology.
➢Volt calls on Europe to support environmental NGOs and activists to
promote
awareness and knowledge of climate change among Chinese
citizens.
3. Europe
Europe should:
➢Demand Chinese internet platforms to guarantee their European users’
freedom of expression and right to privacy. Failing to do so should result
44


in the withdrawal of the business’s licence.37
➢Make operation permissions of Chinese media corporations, cultural
institutions,
and other United Front organisations conditional on
reciprocity, meaning that
European organisations, including government
agencies, media and NGOs must enjoy the same operating space in China as
their Chinese counterparts in Europe, including freedom of expression.38
➢To counter Chinese influence operations:39
○
Recognise and understand the problem by carrying out studies and
developing analytical capacity in government and private sectors;
○
Develop
high-level
guidance
and
policy
on
countering
foreign
interference, issue statements, policy documents, and funding to
establish it as a priority across relevant parts of the bureaucracy;
○
Raise awareness of united front work and foreign interference;
○
Create an environment supportive of transparency and a willingness to
prosecute agents of interference;
○
Protect those exposing interference;
○
Engage with universities to develop responses to related issues, such as
monitoring and mobilisation by Chinese government-backed student
associations; technology transfers; economic coercion, censorship, and
acts of espionage;
○
Support and engage Chinese diaspora communities;
○
Build expertise on China, Chinese people, the CCP and foreign
interference;
○
Deny visas to or expel Chinese agents of foreign interference that
undermine European democracy.
➢Grant the European External Action Service a wider mandate to maintain
value-based relations with the PRC and counteract PRC attempts to
undermine EU
unity, including in bilateral relations and international
platforms.
➢Facilitate and finance personal and cultural exchange with China on all
39 From report ‘The Party Speaks For You’, https://www.aspi.org.au/report/party-speaks-you
38 With respect for the freedom of expression as guaranteed by the European Convention on Human  Rights.
37 This implies (1) that message content cannot be censored when doing so conflicts with the right to freedom of
expression, (2) that user information cannot be shared with foreign governments when this conflicts with the right
to privacy and the GDPR, and (3) that this applies to both European citizens as well as residents, both within and
outside of the borders of the EU. Inability to adhere to these requirements results in revocation of operating
licences. Right to freedom of expression can legally be limited under international law, but such limitations are
conditional on a number of legal checks and balances.
45


levels,
from citizens to governments, from schools to organisations.
In
40
initiating and framing such a variety of contacts, the EU should ensure full
representation of the whole of society in all encounters and processes.
Relaxing visa restrictions will enable such exchanges.
4. Development Cooperation
Volt supports the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and believes that the SDGs should be achieved while
respecting the environment, peace, justice, and gender equality.
Therefore, Volt urges Europe to:
➢Encourage China to respect OECD-DAC rules and standards on good
governance,
environmental protection, and individual rights. Including
through trilateral cooperation on development cooperation projects.
➢Use the membership of EU member states in the AIIB to promote respect
for  said rules and standards in AIIB projects.41
➢Initiate and participate in sustainable development projects connecting
Europe and Asia, such as the Partnership on Sustainable Connectivity and
Quality.
➢Refrain from supporting the BRI as long as its projects fail to meet
minimum
sustainability
standards
on
economic
viability
and
the
environment.
➢Strengthen the European narrative and adopt a more effective approach
to European diplomatic engagement in Africa and other developing partner
countries, bearing the broad relationship in mind.
➢Leverage
Europe’s
status
as
the
biggest
source
of
development
cooperation
finance to increase international support for democratic
principles.
41 With Germany being AIIB´s fourth biggest shareholder.
40 With the exception of exchange of security personnel, such as the police and military forces.
46


5. Supply Chains, Trade Inequality, Technology & 5G
Volt urges Europe to:
➢Realise a comprehensive agreement on investment with China to achieve
equal market access for European businesses in China.
➢Speed
up
the
implementation
of
the
international
procurement
instrument to prevent companies that receive foreign state subsidies from
bidding on  European tenders.
➢Require all Chinese firms operating in Europe to adhere to transparency
standards and accept open governance of their companies and subsidiaries
in Europe.
➢As soon as possible, achieve strategic autonomy from China, particularly
with  respect to essential goods such as medical supplies and rare earths.
➢Diversify supply chains by creating incentives for companies to invest in
markets outside of the PRC, including by exploring opportunities to
conclude value based FTAs with ASEAN, India, Taiwan and other countries or
regions.
➢Carefully monitor the activities of Chinese internet companies and
ensure they respect the rights and freedoms of Europeans, including the
right to privacy.
➢Discourage the Chinese government and companies from engaging in
corporate espionage, including through naming and shaming of identified
cyber criminals.
➢Continue to prevent the export of any knowledge products to China
when these could also be used for military or surveillance purposes.
➢Ensure the independence of European technological infrastructure by
prioritising European tech and service providers over competition from
China
and other autocratic regimes, specifically with respect to 5G
development.
47


6. South China Sea
Volt aligns its position on the PRC’s maritime claims in the SCS with the Tribunal’s
decision. Specifically,
➢The PRC cannot lawfully assert a maritime claim - including any Exclusive
Economic Zone (EEZ) claims derived from Scarborough Reef and the Spratly
Islands - vis-a-vis the Philippines in areas that the Tribunal found to be in the
Philippines’ EEZ or on its continental shelf.
➢As Beijing has failed to put forth a lawful, coherent maritime claim in the
South China Sea, Volt rejects any PRC claim to waters beyond a 12-nautical
mile
territorial sea derived from islands it claims in the Spratly Islands
(without prejudice to other states’ sovereignty claims over such islands).
➢The PRC has no lawful territorial or maritime claim to (or derived from)
James
Shoal, an entirely submerged feature only 50 nautical miles from
Malaysia and some 1,000 nautical miles from China’s coast.
➢Volt calls on Europe to support Southeast Asian states in protecting
their sovereign rights to offshore resources, consistent with their rights
and
obligations under international law. We stand with the international
community in defence of freedom of the seas and respect for sovereignty,
and reject any push to impose “might makes right” in the South China Sea or
the wider region.
➢Europe shall demonstrate its respect for international law by conducting
Freedom of Navigation Operations in the South China Sea, as much as
possible  with like-minded countries.
7. Taiwan
Volt recognizes the achievement of the people of Taiwan in developing and
maintaining
their democracy and recognises the positive impact Taiwan has on
democracy in its region. Therefore, Volt:
➢Calls on all governments involved to settle cross-Strait challenges
peacefully and
refrain from the use of force, as prohibited by the UN
48


Charter.42
➢Recognises the sovereignty of the people of Taiwan and China over,
respectfully,
the
ROC-controlled
territories
and
the
PRC-controlled
territories.43
➢Calls on Europe to engage in diplomatic relations with both the PRC and
Taiwan  governments.44
➢Supports Taiwan’s participation in international organisations, including
UN  organisations.
➢Calls on Europe to facilitate and finance personal and cultural exchange
with
Taiwan on all levels, from citizens to governments, from schools to
organisations.
8. The future of China
The democratisation of China would not only be a historical achievement for the
country
itself, but also immensely beneficial for the world. An international
community where
three great powers (Europe, China, and the USA) collaborate
based on shared values
to develop
international justice and prosperity would
mark the start of an era of peace and stability.
Therefore, Volt urges Europe to:
➢Stimulate the Chinese government to implement domestic democratic
reforms, and ratify and comply with international human rights treaties.
➢Collaborate with and support progressive movements in the PRC.45
45 Eight minor political parties apart from the CCP are legally permitted. But they lack any independent role, as they
are forced into the “United Front” (统一战线;: 統一戰線), which is controlled by the Communist Party and used to
advance its interests.
44 The term ‘ROC-controlled territories’ includes Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen, Matsu and other islands currently
controlled by the Taiwanese government, in accordance with international law. A tribunal at the Permanent Court
of Arbitration in a case between the PRC and the Philippines about the South China Sea questioned Taiwan’s claim
over Itu Aba / Taiping Island due to it not being classified as an island under international law. ‘China’ includes
mainland China, Hong Kong and Macao. The PRC government cannot afford to break diplomatic relations with
Europe, as it is its largest trading partner and Sino-American relations remain fraught. There is precedent for
maintaining diplomatic relations with governments that have overlapping territorial claims, including North/South
Korea, West/East Germany, and North/South  Vietnam.
43 The future status of Tibet should be determined peacefully without coercion from the PRC government.
42 UN Charter article 2(4).
49


➢Support the establishment of a league of democratic nations to design
democratic solutions to global challenges, including in relation to China.46
Volt
representatives in the European Union and national legislatures are
encouraged to join the Inter-Parliamentary Alliance on China, an international
cross-party group of legislators working to reform how democratic countries
approach China.47
Volt members, particularly those with knowledge and experience of China, should
continue their dialogue about China to enable Volt to suggest viable and effective
European policy responses.
47 https://www.ipac.global/
46 https://foreignpolicy.com/2020/06/10/g7-d10-democracy-trump-europe/
50


VI.
Security and Defence Policy Reform
Security is a prerequisite for a well-functioning society. Security provides the basis for
all other matters of governance and society, and sets the conditions for further
development in all fields. It is a resource that the EU requires in order to guarantee
safety, peace, democracy, and prosperity for all Europeans. For the past seventy years,
citizens of Europe have lived in peace. EU Member States have known safety and
security and have been able to develop in peace.
Unfortunately, since the end of the Cold War, the European neighbourhood has
known strife. The Yugoslav war raged in the Balkans during the 1990s. We have known
social instability in the Maghreb, terrorism in the Levant and the Sahel, a war between
Russia and Georgia, the illegal annexation of Crimea by Russia and, most recently, an
open, full-scale war of aggression by Russia against Ukraine. The latter of which
destroyed the existing European Security Network, as it existed until February 2022.
Adding to this, cyber threats are on the rise, with state-sponsored attacks from Russia,
China, and North Korea. Instability and threats to European security, once thought
long gone, have resurfaced, and the EU has not been able to respond to them, let
alone resolve them.
Further afield, other sources of tension or conflicts can also impact our way of life.
About 18 percent of our natural gas and 21 percent of our crude oil pass through an
unstable Middle-East, other resources cross the vulnerable straits of Hormuz and
Malacca, and commercial traffic faces piracy threats in the Gulf of Guinea and around
the Horn of Africa.
NATO and the United Nations have tried to face these challenges, but have only done
so with limited success. Our future will be home to even more complex threats, and
both organisations are unable to develop and adapt fast enough to new types of
warfare or conflict. Neither can we keep counting on our American allies. The Trump
administration has shown that this once-considered mainstay has become uncertain.
In this challenging geopolitical environment, only one conclusion remains: the EU
must be able to develop and maintain its own security and defence policy and
capabilities. Other actors and organisations can be partnered with, but they cannot be
expected to keep warranting European safety. Our security is European and requires
European patronage.
A. Vision
A strong Europe must stand up for its citizens. The protection of our citizens, territory,
and values is one of the core tasks of the EU, and one we can only accomplish by
coming together. The universally acclaimed values recognised by the UN and the
51


international community must be defended.
In this complex geopolitical environment, it is up to our political leaders to tackle the
challenges we face and ensure peace and security. These challenges do not end at
national borders and therefore cannot be appropriately and fully dealt with at the
national level or by national institutions. Our respective security is the security of all
Europeans, and the defence of the continent is the defence of all Europeans. As such,
the only level where these challenges can be adequately dealt with is at the
continental level. In the short term, the EU’s policy and cooperation on security and
defence must be strengthened; in the medium term, the EU must achieve the
integration of all its security and defence components.
Future EU defence policy must aim to protect the EU and its citizens by constructing a
common defence system capable of dealing effectively with threats both near and far.
The pooling by Member States of their financial, human, logistical, and intelligence
resources will be far more efficient and greatly improve safety across the EU.
Overall, we must not lose focus on the ultimate goal of security and defence, be it
local, national, or continental, to ensure our society and our citizens are free to strive
and prosper. Currently, national security policies, including military deployments and
procurement strategies, focus too often on individual national interests and domestic
political aims. Meanwhile, 75 percent of Europeans favour close cooperation between
European armies, and 41 percent of them do not even see the need for the
independent deployment of national armies.
We believe that the security of
48
European citizens takes precedence over individual nations' or governments' domestic
political or economic agendas.
In the end, only a united European security and defence policy can ensure permanent
security while operating on the most efficient, innovative, and impactful basis.
Our vision for European security and defence has three building blocks:
(1)
Democratic
decision­-making.
European capabilities go hand-in-hand with
European decision-making. Matters of European security and defence must be
decided at the European level, as part of the democratic and parliamentary process;
no backroom deals between national governments will be allowed when it comes to
the security of European citizens. European military capabilities must be directed by a
European Central Command ( eventually under the responsibility of a European
Ministry of Defence and under parliamentary control) following a common plan and a
common military doctrine.
(2) A fully integrated defence force. Under this unique civilian command, there must
be one
European military force for the assurance that Europe can independently
48 Based on a YouGov poll conducted for the Munich Security Conference. Published in the 2017 Munich
Security Conference REport “More European, More Connected and More Capable”, available at
http://www.eventanizer.com/MSR/european-defense/
52


respond to conventional and non-conventional threats to its territory and population.
This
must
include
expeditionary
forces
that
will,
whenever
necessary,
act
autonomously, as part of a comprehensive security approach and across the spectrum
of war. This approach also includes peaceful instruments of conflict resolution (e.g.
humanitarian operations, military assistance, peace enforcement, peace building,
disarmament,
and
state­building).
While
command
structures will be unified,
integrated European military forces will be disseminated across the continent and
European citizens will be able to enlist irrespective of their country of origin.
(3) Create a common security culture. Events in recent years have shown cracks in
classical security theories. On the one hand, 9/11 reminded us that we do not only
face governmental actors. On the other hand, the Russian war of aggression against
Ukraine and the emergence of China as a major military power that seems willing to
use its military to assert illegal territorial claims show that geopolitical conflicts
between states have not ended
and that the world has become increasingly
multipolar and fragmented. Collective defence scenarios have resurfaced. We cannot
prepare for a single type of military engagement but must be ready for all types of
military actions at the same time, be it to ensure our own defence, act under a UN
mandate, or implement the Responsibility to Protect principle.
Armed forces have to
49
simultaneously prepare for expeditionary counter-insurgent interventions (such as in
Afghanistan and Mali), military assistance (as in Niger and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo), conventional wars, and large-scale cyber attacks against civilian and
military targets. Rapid changes, including the withdrawal of the US from collective
security and the emergence of new powers, must be closely followed. These
challenges require a flexible and forward-looking European security and defence
doctrine to replace the current mosaic of national policies. We require real security,
not a false sense of security. In practice, security measures often make us feel safer
but limit our rights and freedom without increasing our actual safety. Volt calls for the
development of a common European security policy: a system that provides a
workable framework
for European defence. This includes a system of checks and
balances to limit the scope of security policy in European society while allowing us to
build European capacities to participate swiftly and impactfully in global assignments,
with the explicit goal of acting within existing global conventions and principles,
respectfully of the rule of law and humanitarian law, and, whenever possible, as part
of UN-mandated missions.
49 The Responsibility to Protect is a global political commitment which was endorsed by all Member
States of the United Nations at the 2005 World Summit in order to address its four key concerns to
prevent genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. The Responsibility to
Protect is based upon the premise that sovereignty entails a responsibility to protect all populations
from mass atrocity crimes and human rights violations. The principle is based on a respect for the
norms and principles of international law, especially the underlying principles of law relating to
sovereignty, peace and security, human rights, and armed conflict. Mandate of the Office on Genocide
Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect, available at
http://www.un.org/en/genocideprevention/office-mandate.html#sarp
53


Volt supports the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and supports
the global disarmament of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction.
While pursuing disarmament to the fullest extent possible through these means, Volt
supports research and development in the field of defensive systems against cutting
edge delivery nuclear warhead delivery systems.
As for the current European arsenal of nuclear warheads being owned by France, in
the long term, Volt naturally supports the Europeanisation of this arsenal once
European security forces are united under a single chain of command overseen by a
functioning European democracy. Until this point, France will maintain its nuclear
arsenal. Given growing concerns about the US’s long-term commitment to European
security, the European Union must seek adequate methods of deterrence, offensive
and defensive, to provide for its own security going forward.
B. Democratic Decision-Making
Military actors may only act in the name of the political institutions to which they owe
their loyalty. In return, these political institutions provide the military apparatus with
the required means to perform their tasks and provide them with a place in society.
Military and civilian institutions should always be interlinked.
➢Transform parliamentary oversight. Volt wants to achieve parliamentary
oversight by requiring a qualified majority in the European Parliament and the
Council of Ministers for standard deployments of European military forces. In
the event of an emergency, military action by the European executive can be
considered limited in scope and time under ex post parliamentary control,
instead of prior approval; the conditions for these emergency situations must
be clearly defined. To ensure this oversight, a full-fledged Committee on
Security and Defence should be established in Parliament, building on the
existing subcommittee, to ensure that the European Parliament holds the
European Defence Minister(s) accountable. The European Parliament should
also decide on military spending: in the short term, a defence component
should be included in the Multiannual Financial Framework, which would
develop into a defence budget in the long term.
➢Create
a
European
Ministry
of
Defence
with an integrated civilian
command. A true and efficient European Defence Force requires a proper
command structure. Volt's vision for an integrated civilian command structure
is that of a clear hierarchy from the smallest military unit all the way up to a
European
Ministry of Defence, replacing the current national defence
ministers.
54


C. Integrated European Defence Forces
➢Establish a European Defence Force. The long-term goal is to have one
unified European Defence Force. Currently, the EU has only an unfinished
headquarters, a border control (FRONTEX), and temporary task forces. If the EU
needs to be able to act in a multipolar world, it needs an appropriate European
Defence Force that can act quickly and independently from other security
actors.
Volt supports moving from existing multilateral cooperation across the EU
Member States to the full integration of a European Defence Force that will
make European security and defence (1) more effective, by adding a credible
military component to the EU’s comprehensive security approach; (2) more
efficient, by removing duplication in command structures and equipment; and
(3) less costly, by benefiting from economies of scale in military procurement
and logistics. Volt calls on willing EU Member States to move ahead with
permanent structured cooperation, as set out in the Lisbon Treaty, with other
Member States able to join at a later point.
Long-standing regional partners
50
like the Benelux and the Baltic States can already start the unification of their
military capabilities. These regional unifications will be able to showcase the
benefits of a common defence infrastructure and policy will encourage
additional EU Member States to join them. Ultimately, there will be permanent
forces under a unified EU military command with a permanent military
headquarters.
The
already
existing
Eurocorps,
different
EU
operations
and
long-standing regional military cooperation like, for example, those between
the
Netherlands, Belgium, Germany and the Baltic States, and the Visegrad
Group Defence Cooperation show that the European Union has established the
basic operational readiness of a European Defence Force. Most Member States
of the EU are already NATO Members, so their military forces “speak” the same
military language across all branches. In fact, there is already a very good
foundation for a European Defence Force, made up of already well-cooperative
EU forces that can be deployed where necessary. Just as NATO also operates
with the forces of ever-different
members,
All this needs “only” to be
politically supported, enforced, and deepened.
➢Establish permanent operational headquarters. The EU is currently carrying
out different operations and has already run other operations. None of these
were run by a permanent headquarters. To enable faster and more coordinated
reactions, the EU needs permanent headquarters and command structures.
Each time, a tailored headquarter is created. Not only does the repeated
50 European Parliament, Implementation of the Lisbon Treaty provisions on the Common Security and
Defence Policy, available at
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/BRIE/2016/573285/EPRS_BRI%282016%29573285_E
N.pdf
55


establishment
and
termination
of
headquarters
result
in
unnecessary
expenditure, but it also means a damaging loss of operational experience. It
will allow for the creation of standing operational orders instead of relying on
NATO doctrine only. It will permit the continuous collection of lessons learned
and allow long-term planning. Volt embraces the idea of using already working
command structures and permanent operational headquarters (OHQs). For the
naval forces, we propose to use the former MARCOM in Naples (where there is
still a NATO command post) and, for land and air forces, SHAPE and SACEUR in
Belgium. The staff of the EDF will then sit in a room next to that of the NATO
staff and, where appropriate, cooperate with that staff. In addition, the EDF can
operate independently from NATO. This organisational construction is subject
to evaluation. This is all the more true if there should be no more cooperation
with NATO at all. This construction can be improved or changed over time if
necessary.
Permanent operational headquarters (OHQ’s) should be under the oversight of
the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
and an elected representative of the EU Parliament. ( similar to the North
Atlantic Council ).
In the event of a military emergency, the OHQ must act to stop this emergency.
The mandate for this is limited by the duration of the emergency and until the
EU Parliament or the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy intervenes.
Finally, permanent OHQ’s can serve as a link to various organisations and/or
countries.
➢Transform the EDA into a Procurement Department. The current work of the
European Defence Agency needs to be upgraded into a Procurement
Department within the European Defence Ministry. This means moving from
coordination of national procurement to central procurement by the EU and
from loose working groups to permanent EU staff drawn from experts
currently working within member states.
➢Promote
common
procurement
across
Member
States
with
minimal
exceptions. Armed forces are driven in a large part by logistics. International
common purchases of material enable cooperation, allow synergy on both a
joint and international level, and allow streamlining of combat service support
during operations and exercises. Additionally, when different Member States
procure new material together, be it an assault rifle or a transport aeroplane,
one single version should be bought instead of different versions for each
Member State. Exceptions to this rule must be limited to a minimum, otherwise
different Member States will buy the same material in name but will still not be
able to efficiently support each other when deployed.
56


European national armies currently have 37 different types of armoured
personnel carriers, 19 sorts of combat aircraft, and 12 different types of tanker
aircraft. By sharing infantry vehicles, for instance, EU countries could save an
estimated €600 million per year. Likewise, a shared ammunition certification
system would annually save an estimated €500 million. Greater integration of
European defence industries with due regard to their potential influence on
the political process, as well as the need to avoid an arms race, can also
contribute to a rationalisation of costs and military expenses.
We can already start rationalising the procurement of new systems. Once a
European Army has been established, the EDA would function as the EU's
procurement agency. Exceptions must be determined at the European level
only and different versions of a weapons system should only be determined by
their environment of use (sea, arctic, desert, mountain, etc.) and not regional or
national preferences.
➢Establish a Cyber Security Department. The essential infrastructures within
Europe, such as electricity, medical, water, and communications, etc., need
special protection from any kind of cyber-related attacks. We believe that an
EU defence policy must also incorporate non-military assets and means for
non-military/unconventional warfare. Cyber warfare is becoming increasingly
effective and dangerous, as we rely more and more on digital infrastructure.
Furthermore, disinformation and misinformation (particularly by Russia) has
been used to sow discord and sectarianism in societies by both foreign and
domestic actors. This must also be addressed in a European-wide defence
force, with the ability to share best-practices between nations. Work according
to the External Action Service of the European Union (CSDP). A Cyber Security
Department within the European Defense Ministry will pool Europe’s external
cyber security efforts. It would function as the external corner stone of
Europe’s cyber security, working closely with internal cyber security institutions
of the police.
The legislation in the Member States needs an addition to, in case of an
external attack, to draft cyber security specialists to reinforce the already
existing forces.
D. Common security culture
➢Develop a European military culture and identity. The most successful
military forces were always intrinsically linked to the society they defended.
Soldiers make the greatest sacrifice in order to defend the values and morals of
their country. In a world of growing unilateral action and nationalism, the EU
stands for universal values of multilateralism, justice, freedom, democracy and
equality. As European integration proceeds, a European Military Culture and
Identity must defend these enlightened ideals. The European soldier must be
57


rooted in a European esprit de corps — values adhered to by every soldier,
regardless of rank. Wisdom, courage, discipline, a mastering of the self and a
sense of justice are the values that the European soldier must promote.
➢Create proper European Security and Defence Academies. In order to
develop a European Military Culture and Identity within cadres, educational
institutions play a vital role. Currently, the European Security and Defence
College (ESDC) only provides training and education at EU level in the field of
the Common Security and Defence Policy. While the aims of the ESDC are
excellent and fully receive Volt’s support, they do not go far enough. Each
branch of the European Defence must have its own academy forming its cadres.
EU military doctrine and European values must be taught to cadres from the
moment they enter the military education system.
Initial and continued formation of all cadres, from the cadet to the
highest-ranking EU military personnel and civil servants, on a wide range of
security issues. Courses must be based on the latest research and taught by the
world’s most eminent experts. Volt encourages the traditional, military-centric
security curriculum to be opened up to insights from broader security studies,
including but not limited to critical security theory, in order to create reflective
and responsible security actors.
Beyond
the
strict
level
of
European
educational institutions, national
academies must immediately increase the language capacities of all military
men and women in their ranks. In particular, it is essential that all European
officers be able to speak to and precisely understand each other. In line with
existing practice, Volt recommends that all European officers become
proficient in English
so as to ensure good communication between national
forces and avoid consequential misunderstandings.
➢Military Policy We emphasise that Europe should be able to respond to
aggression with or without hybrid means . And, as of now, it looks like the EU is
not fully prepared to take care of its own defence. (European Defence: The
Challenge of Strategic Autonomy , 2019). The illegal Russian war against
Ukraine has shown that it was wrong to regard an invasion of European
territory as unthinkable. We should anticipate that this act of aggression in the
pursuit of territorial, political, or economic benefit at the expense of the EU
might not remain the only one of its kind. In such an event, the EU should not
be forced to rely on the US, which, aside from at times showing wavering
support for European security, has made valid remarks regarding the lack of
capacity of the EU for self-defence. As such, the EU must be prepared to defend
itself by itself. The EU must be prepared for many contingencies. The EU must
behave as if it were a hedgehog (to a statement by Mr. Macron): Not aggressive,
but able to stand up for itself. We need well-equipped, well-trained, flexible
dispersed quick reaction units. This has already been partially provided for in
the form of Rapid Reaction Forces and EU Battlegroups. In view of the above,
the necessary infrastructure should be in place to achieve the quick
58


deployment of geographically dispersed EU units to the scene of a potential
conflict situation created by an adversary. That is why we support the Military
Mobility project, part of the EU's Permanent Structured Cooperation (PeSCo). In
a world of deteriorating systems and orders, it is no longer possible to achieve
a stable peace by military means alone. The European Defence Force must be
capable of responding to asymmetric and symmetric warfare, as well as
stabilisation and defensive operations. Furthermore, will it embrace the CIMIC
(Civilian Military Cooperation ) idea for UN and other operations? It is important
that the people of Europe have a clear understanding of the role of their
military forces and a deep connection to them. Just like it is crucial that the
military feels/has a strong connection to the society it is serving. Only through
mutual understanding will the EDF be able to successfully fulfil its role of
ensuring Europe's peace and prosperity. To further this understanding, all
efforts should be made to expand knowledge about the role and mission of the
European army in the public as well as make the military more accessible to the
average citizen by, for example, holding open days at military bases.
Finally, a
unified European Defence Force will make it possible to use diplomacy more
effectively by providing the necessary hard power to support diplomatic
measures.
➢Formulate a white book on European security and defence. On the basis of
the EU’s Global Strategy (EUGS),
Volt calls for the formulation of a White
51
Book, under the auspices of the EEAS, setting out the EU’s shared outlook on
the security environment, defining ambitions and establishing a roadmap for
further integration. This White Book would also be an opportunity to outline
our willingness to limit attempts at a global arms race, develop a position on
autonomous
lethal
weapons,
and
recall
our
attachment
to
internationally-agreed principles and treaties, including the 1967 Outer Space
Treaty, the 2014 Space Preservation Treaty, as well as our non-proliferation and
disarmament commitments under the 1968 Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons.
E. Relationship with other security actors
➢Review the EU-NATO relationship. Since nearly all EU Member States are
members of NATO and the cooperation between the EDF and NATO is a given
constant,
we believe that NATO remains a relevant alliance, not just for
collective defence but also as an expression of common values that bind
members across the Atlantic. At the same time, the EU cannot blindly rely on
territorial defence through NATO but must develop an independent ability to
defend itself. By closely coordinating with NATO, the EU would avoid
51 The EU Global Strategy was presented in June 2016 by HR/VP Federica Mogherini. Global Strategy for
the European Union’s Foreign And Security Policy, available at
https://eeas.europa.eu/archives/docs/top_stories/pdf/eugs_review_web.pdf
59


duplication and make the Alliance stronger. In the long term, as European
Defence develops further, the relationship between NATO and a reformed EU
needs to be revisited. In particular, the EU must become an equal partner to the
US within NATO, both in terms of means and influence within the organisation.
The handling of any crisis will be faster because the European Union will speak
as one. The EU will become one of the dominant geopolitical players, a
trustworthy and faithful partner to NATO that is able to ensure its own security.
The cooperation within NATO will continue. We should neither reinvent tried
and true tactics nor establish new procedures and operational rules for their
own sake, which are both costly and unnecessary. Standard operational
procedures such as STANAG can eventually evolve into specific European rules
and procedures. We can benefit from the long-standing shared NATO
experience without having to reinvent the wheel, so to speak. As was the case
with NATO in the beginning, the EDF will need to learn how to coordinate and
incorporate all of the forces of the various contributing Member States that
have chosen to devolve some of their sovereignty to the EU in the interest of a
stronger Europe. At the end of this process the EU will replace its single
member countries in NATO.
➢Strengthen the EU-UN relationship. The UN is one of the main global security
actors and, despite its need for reform and more democracy, the most
legitimate. Many EU missions run side-by-side with a UN mission. Additionally,
the UN is able to provide frameworks and legitimacy through its General
Assembly and Security Council. The noble goals of the UN are in line with the
goals of the EU and a tight bond is required between the two. Volt supports
increasing the EU’s involvement in security matters handled by the UN, as well
as strengthening the UN’s capacity to act whenever necessary to limit armed
conflicts and violence around the globe.
Whenever possible, the EU must strive to secure a UN mandate for military
actions. Dialogue with the Security Council and the General Assembly should
always be maintained and general consensus reached.
In line with Volt’s proposals for UN reform, permanent seats by any EU Member
State on the Security Council must be converted into a single EU seat.
Additionally, Volt has defined desired UN reforms as part of its foreign affairs
policy. This would allow a permanent and coherent European voice, better able
to defend the interests and values of the global community.
➢Strengthen the OSCE as a forum for Europe-wide security. Renewed conflict
and tensions with Russia, such as over the annexation of Ukrainian territory,
mean that the EU needs an effective forum to deal with security issues in its
neighbourhood. Volt calls for enhancing the role and capacities of the OSCE,
both to deal with ongoing crises, as is currently the case in Ukraine, and to
establish a permanent dialogue on security-related matters between the EU
and its OSCE partners, most notably Russia.
60


➢Strengthen
military
cooperation
with
partners
worldwide.
The
new
European Ministry of Defence will establish multiple new relations with other
security actors. These actors can be individual nations or multinational
organisations. Partnerships, plans and dialogues will be established with major
security actors, amongst which the EU will take a leading role. Organisations
such as the Arab League and the African Union are also valuable partners. Volt
understands the dire need for cooperation with our neighbouring continents
and organisations as a result of the Comprehensive Approach. All new
cooperation and partnerships will be in line with the values and ethical code of
conduct of the European Union and the United Nations, as well as with
principles of international law.
61


