 
Officials’ Handbook - 23.11.2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Officials’ Handbook 
Volt Europa A.I.S.B.L. 
[As updated on 23.11.2025] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For questions or proposed updates to this handbook, contact eoo@volteuropa.org. 
 
1 


 
Officials’ Handbook - 23.11.2025 
 
Content 
1. Introduction​
3 
2. Support across Volt​
4 
3. Public Engagement​
5 
4. Policy​
8 
5. The Volt working environment​
10 
6. Elections​
13 
7. Training and Development​
14 
8. Emergency Management​
15 
Appendix A: EOO Contact details​
16 
Appendix B: Policy Checklist​
17 
Appendix C: Guidelines for specific mandates/ regions​
19 
Appendix D: To do list​
20 
 
 
 
2 


 
Officials’ Handbook - 23.11.2025 
 
1. Introduction  
This handbook provides practical guidelines for the day-to-day work of the Officials of Volt 
Europa within and outside Volt Europa, before and during a political mandate. Officials - and 
the broader membership of Volt Europa (Members) - are encouraged, to the extent legally 
allowed, to follow this handbook. The handbook is based on Volt’s core values and principles 
as expressed in the Statutes, the Internal Regulations and the Integrity Syllabus of Volt 
Europa.  
 
Within Volt Europa, we identify two types of Officials:  
 
●​ Elected Officials (EOs): Members of Volt Europa elected to a public elected body.  
●​ Appointed Officials (AOs): Members of Volt Europa appointed to a public mandate by 
the member(s) of a public elected body. 
  
This handbook was developed by the European Officials’ Office (EOO), with inputs and 
feedback from Officials and the broader membership of Volt Europa. The EOO informs 
Officials and Volt Europa whenever the handbook is updated.  
 
 
3 


 
Officials’ Handbook - 23.11.2025 
 
2. Support across Volt 
Volt aspires to effective collaboration and exchanges between Officials, functional teams, and 
the European Officials' Office (EOO). This chapter outlines what can be expected from each 
actor.  
 
2.1. EOO 
The EOO is the European functional team that supports the Officials on all levels across 
Europe. Much of this entails connecting Officials with the relevant functional teams within 
Volt (e.g. Volt Academy), expertise, and Officials in other countries. In some cases, it may be 
able to help with specific tasks. Officials are expected to engage with the EOO to the best of 
their ability.  
 
When allowed by the respective body of representation, the EOO: 
 
●​ Maintains an overview of Officials and their staff; 
●​ Connects Officials with each other in order to work together and share best practice; 
●​ Helps Officials develop a common Volt vision and goals;  
●​ Ensures that Officials’ work remains in line with Volt’s values; 
●​ Supports Officials in building knowledge and skills; 
●​ Provides tools and methods; 
●​ Shares successes by Officials; 
●​ Facilitates Official’s internal and external communications.  
  
Officials’ Summit 
All Officials from across Europe, or within a region, are invited to attend Officials’ Summits. 
Through workshops on topics of relevance to the daily work of Officials, they exchange ideas, 
tips, and advice on issues they are dealing with through their mandates.  
 
2.2. Officials supporting each other 
Officials are strongly encouraged to exchange best practices within towns, regions, countries, 
and across Europe. In addition, the EOO can support exchanges by helping to identify the 
most relevant Official to respond to any specific query that another Official may have.  
 
For longer-term support, the EOO is setting up a mentorship programme, specifically pairing 
newer Officials with experienced ones. Although becoming a mentor is voluntary, it may 
require more dedication. If you are no longer able to be a mentor, you are asked to find a new 
buddy for your mentee to replace you. 
 
2.3. Functional Teams 
The functional teams of Volt (like comms, policy, etc.) are available to collaborate with 
Officials on joint tasks. Functional teams differ per Chapter and country.
 
4 


 
Officials’ Handbook - 23.11.2025 
 
3. Public Engagement 
Officials are expected to engage with the public and the membership of Volt as often as 
possible throughout their mandate in order to address society’s needs, taking into account 
§2.5. Officials’ Code of Conduct of the Integrity Syllabus. They should: 
 
●​ Listen and identify challenges and solutions. Understanding that concerns, 
problems, and ideas can be achieved through social media listening, participation in 
events, research, and/or grass-roots initiatives, listening to focused campaigning, and 
giving special attention to minority voices in order to ensure inclusivity. 
●​ Translate challenges and solutions into policy and practice. Once key societal 
challenges are identified, Officials can develop or adapt solutions by engaging with 
affected citizens, key stakeholders, and experts, while referencing existing policies and 
best practice at local, country, European and, if relevant, global levels. Officials should 
bring solutions and ideas from practical politics into Volt, and vice versa.  
 
3.1. Communication 
In their communication, Officials, and other Members, are required to follow the Volt Brand 
Guidance and §2.2. Communication & Public Relations of the Integrity Syllabus. Along with this 
Volt way of communicating, Officials should try to connect with the whole of their 
constituency. This means communicating:  
 
●​ in a relatable manner; 
●​ constructively and transparently; 
●​ about  
○​ their work, and that of their government; 
○​ voices from their constituency; 
○​ Volt’s core themes and actions; 
○​ the mistakes they make in their actions. 
●​ a unique perspective on current issues and political developments, rather than 
repeating what others are saying.  
 
Officials can collaborate with Volt members in charge of communication in their municipality, 
region, or country, depending on resources. Ideally, they can provide additional support in 
instances of sensitive, or potentially controversial, media engagements.  
 
Developing a communication plan helps to set goals, coordinate platforms, and schedule 
posts.  
 
3.1.1. Social media 
Maintaining an active and authentic presence on multiple social media platforms is key to 
communicating with a constituency. Different regions and age groups favour different 
channels. Tips: 
5 


 
Officials’ Handbook - 23.11.2025 
 
 
●​ Engage with personal messages and comments, while adhering to the aforementioned 
communication guidelines; 
●​ Collaborate with the social media account administrators of different Volt Chapters 
and Volt Europa – this will help increase engagement with your posts; 
●​ Support and collaborate with the social media channels of other Officials (e.g. sharing 
best practice, and giving feedback). 
 
3.1.2. Regular media 
Officials are encouraged to be accessible and willing to respond to media inquiries 
professionally. This means:  
 
●​ responding in a timely manner; 
●​ being prepared; 
●​ covering a wide range of media outlets; 
●​ coordinating with other Officials to avoid contradictions; 
●​ sharing experiences with other Officials.  
 
3.1.3. Volt media 
Via the Volt websites and newsletters, Officials can spread information and enhance their 
visibility within the party. They can reach out to the responsible website and newsletter teams 
within Volt. 
 
3.1.4. Haiilo 
On Haiilo, Officials can get input on current topics, and also engage with the entire Volt 
community.  
 
3.2. Events 
Events are a vital tool for Officials to engage with members and the general public. Officials 
can organise their own events, attend other events on invitation, and also engage in local 
events by actively reaching out to organisers. Officials should take care to only make reliable 
and realistic commitments.  
 
3.2.1. Public events 
Officials are encouraged to attend a wide range of events in order to broaden their network 
and increase engagement. There, they can seek dialogue and listen to differing opinions. 
Before attending an event, Officials should check whether the event aligns with Volt values so 
that they can know what to expect. Therefore, Officials should try to find out: 
 
●​ what the goals of the event are; 
●​ what is the focus of the organiser/host organisation; 
●​ who else will attend. 
 
6 


 
Officials’ Handbook - 23.11.2025 
 
3.2.2. Volt events 
Officials are encouraged to attend and promote Volt events. If it is not possible for the 
Official to attend a relevant Volt event themselves, they should try to delegate someone from 
their faction, or support team, to attend in their place.  
 
3.2.3. Faction events 
Officials are encouraged, every once in a while, to host events themselves for the benefit of 
the Volt community and/ or the general public, in order to give insight into their 
representative work.  
 
3.3. External Collaboration 
External collaboration and cooperation with others is key to achieving both individual 
objectives or shared bigger goals (e.g., supporting the integration of migrants through 
collaborations with NGOs; increasing European focus on raising standards of education within 
schools; enabling new innovations with start-ups). Officials can also refer to guidance in §2.5. 
Officials’ Code of Conduct of the Integrity Syllabus. Possible partnerships may include 
collaborations with: 
 
●​ Grassroots and citizens’ initiatives – crucial for encouraging participation beyond 
elections, and allowing citizens to be involved in ongoing community-organising 
campaigns while promoting a culture of collaboration. This reinforces Volt’s 
grassroots’ character, and commitment to inclusivity. 
●​ Experts and NGOs – vital for policy development. Maintaining contact with experts, 
knowledge institutions, civil society organisations, and citizen platforms keeps Volt 
informed, and innovative.  
●​ Political parties – essential partners to advancing policy goals and implementing 
Volt’s agenda.  
●​ Companies – these can provide resources and support for Volt’s initiatives. 
●​ Activists and influencers – add diverse perspectives and valuable expertise.  
 
To identify a suitable partner, Officials should answer the following questions:  
 
●​ Are the partner’s values, goals and ambitions aligned with yours/ Volt’s? 
●​ Are you, and the partner, in a position to effectively contribute to the joint initiative?  
●​ Do you have recommendations from others who have worked with the partner? 
 
When collaborating with a partner, Officials should make use of Volt's network and expert 
databases, and work together with Volt teams (e.g., policy) to develop and implement partner 
initiatives. 
 
7 


 
Officials’ Handbook - 23.11.2025 
 
4. Policy 
Volt advocates for coherent European policy creation and implementation, which results in 
certain expectations of both Volt Europa and the Officials. This chapter outlines the specific 
roles and expectations of each actor in this process.  
 
4.1. Policy development within Volt 
Volt is responsible for the development of policies, including research, expert consultations, 
and legal advice. This means that volunteers and employees of Volt facilitate and produce 
policy and electoral programmes from within Policy Teams. Officials are encouraged to play a 
major role in these processes, but are not responsible for coordination or the final content. In 
cases of disagreement with existing policies, Officials should collaborate with the Policy 
Teams to avoid inconsistencies, and ensure harmonization with Volt’s values.  
 
The Policy Teams work together with the European Communities of Volt, in which people 
from any given region or administrative level can participate on topics related to the focus 
area of the Community. These Communities make sure that policies across Volt Europa are 
aligned. The people working on policies should always prioritise societal needs, and integrate 
best practice from other cities, regions, and countries where applicable. Within the 
Communities, they can exchange knowledge with local governments and partner cities. 
Officials are encouraged to join the Communities that cover their areas of interest and/ or 
responsibility. 
 
Especially before upcoming elections, electoral programmes will be voted on at a GA (General 
Assembly). After an election, the approved electoral programme forms the policy framework 
for the Elected Officials. 
 
4.2. Policy implementation 
Officials are expected to adhere to and advocate for Volt policies and values amongst others 
by translating Volt policies into legislative motions, decisions or proposals. They are 
encouraged to follow Volt’s grassroots approach by listening to and collaborating with 
citizens, organisations and the members of Volt. 
 
At the beginning of their term, Officials but specifically Elected Officials should prioritise the 
policies they want to implement during their mandate and explain their priorities in their 
communication. This will ensure that the membership and the general public are 
transparently informed from the start of an Official’s mandate. When they change their 
priorities during their mandate, Officials should communicate these changes. 
 
During their mandate, Officials and the Policy Teams of Volt are encouraged to cooperate. The 
Policy Teams of Volt can support Officials by presenting new policies and providing expertise 
and assistance in fine tuning policies. This support can be coordinated with the Thematic 
Communities as mentioned in the previous paragraph. Vice versa, Officials can support the 
8 


 
Officials’ Handbook - 23.11.2025 
 
Policy Teams by passing on information like “What policies need to be developed?”. Officials 
encounter a great deal of information that is useful to policy teams.  
 
Volt acknowledges that any expertise is essential for effective governance and policy-making. 
Therefore, any expert may be involved in advisory roles or specific working groups when their 
expertise is relevant to Volt’s objectives.  
 
Officials are also encouraged to support each other in policy implementation by offering 
expertise, feedback and insights.  
​
When there are no existing Volt policies on specific topics, Officials should align their 
approach with the closest Volt policy in close cooperation with the relevant Policy Team. They 
are always expected to communicate the status and impact of new policy proposals with Volt. 
 
For political positioning, Officials should collaborate with the team responsible for political 
positioning to ensure coherence. If Officials want to communicate statements that exceed 
their administrative level, they should always reach out to the EOO. 
 
In general, Officials can use the Policy Checklist.  
 
4.3. Policy accountability  
Accountability is at the core of Volt’s governance. To ensure accountability and transparency 
in their policy implementation, Officials are encouraged to: 
 
●​ frequently meet with their respective Volt Board to align strategic priorities, assess 
long-term goals, and review their work;  
●​ publish an annual report that highlights their legislative activities, policy initiatives, 
and participation in committees at the end of the year. The report will include updates 
on policy goals, progress, the challenges faced, and can be published on the relevant 
Volt website for transparency, and also shared via other communications channels. In 
the report, updated policy goals and action points are to be set for the upcoming year. 
 
9 


 
Officials’ Handbook - 23.11.2025 
 
5. The Volt working environment  
By creating a sustainable and healthy working environment, Officials apply the Volt principle 
“practice what you preach”. This principle guides both policy choices and personal behaviour, 
ensuring that daily practices are consistent with Volt’s broader vision for a green, and 
inclusive, future. Officials can also refer to guidance in §2.5. Officials’ Code of Conduct of the 
Integrity Syllabus. 
 
5.1. Building and leading a Team and Office 
If applicable, Officials should quickly build a team to support them after being elected, or 
appointed. Officials should encourage the people supporting them to join as Members or, at 
minimum, registered Supporters. 
 
Officials are encouraged to collaborate with other Officials to ensure effective team dynamics 
across the party, by sharing resources, knowledge, and experiences with regards to team 
management and building.  
 
To lead effectively, Officials should: 
 
●​ Foster a collaborative, efficient, and positive team environment, ensuring fair 
workload distribution to prevent overburdening.  
●​ Promote transparency and accountability within their team. 
●​ Set clear goals together with the team, provide constructive feedback, and ensure that 
team members feel valued and supported. 
●​ Maintain strong communication channels to ensure that everyone is aligned with the 
team's objectives. 
●​ Demonstrate awareness of their team members' well-being, have personal 
conversations with team members when they appear to be in trouble or unwell and, if 
needed, direct towards professional support. 
●​ Respect individual boundaries, and the work-life balance of peers. 
 
Elected Officials  
Depending on political legislation and the administrative level, Elected Officials are 
encouraged to apply the following when entering public elected body where Volt is not yet 
represented:  
 
1.​ Establish a new foundation with a Board, statutes, regulations, and a bank account. All 
statutes and regulations must follow Volt’s statutes and regulations. 
2.​ Publish relevant job or volunteer vacancies for the support team. A new team member 
will need to sign a non-disclosure agreement, and a contract. 
3.​ Instal safety and security protocols (i.e., strong passwords and 2F-authentication).  
 
10 


 
Officials’ Handbook - 23.11.2025 
 
Elected Officials should stay in touch with the other Volt candidates of their electoral list, as 
they may be the only eligible replacements. If the system allows for replacements, this helps 
ensure a smooth handover in case of long or temporary absences, like illness or parental 
leave. 
 
5.2. Sustainability  
Reducing waste and conserving resources should be routine, and aligned with the broader 
framework of the United Nations 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), guiding 
sustainable action across environmental, social, and economic dimensions. Officials are 
encouraged to: 
 
●​ Minimise printing to reduce paper waste.  
●​ Fix work devices instead of replacing them.  
●​ Take energy efficiency measures for their offices.  
●​ Choose plant-based options for any work-related meals. 
●​ Avoid single-use plastics. 
●​ Minimise water use. 
●​ Prioritise eco-friendly daily commuting (public transport, cycling, walking, carpooling, 
etc.). 
●​ Weigh the benefits of in-person meetings against the environmental impact of 
transportation.  
 
5.3. Budgeting and financial planning 
Officials' finances should comply with Volt’s Integrity Syllabus. Unless covered by the body of 
representation, the Official, or the person with financial responsibility, should: 
 
●​ Conduct accounting of incoming and outgoing cash flow;  
●​ Manage expenses and reimbursements; 
●​ Execute payrolls for employees; 
●​ Coordinate the yearly budget process. 
 
5.4. (Mental) Health  
To prevent burn-out and drop-outs, Officials are encouraged to set clear personal boundaries, 
and to actively promote a culture of care within their teams by: 
●​ Staying mindful of their own well-being, taking time to rest and recharge; 
●​ Prioritising tasks effectively to maintain a healthy balance between political, personal, 
and professional commitments; 
●​ Communicating personal limits transparently, managing both internal and external 
expectations; 
●​ Proactively conducting regular well-being check-ins with team members to identify 
stress factors early, and offer support where needed; 
11 


 
Officials’ Handbook - 23.11.2025 
 
●​ Fostering an open environment where discussing mental health and workload 
concerns is normalised, and free of stigma. 
With regard to general and mental health concerns, Volt commits to: 
●​ Understanding and respecting workload fluctuations or personal circumstances; 
●​ Encouraging a healthy culture that prioritises well-being alongside productivity; 
●​ Providing access to psychological support through the relevant body of 
representation, or via the EOO when additional assistance is needed. 
 
 
12 


 
Officials’ Handbook - 23.11.2025 
 
6. Elections 
Volt coordinates election campaigns. During these campaigns, candidates and Elected 
Officials carry specific responsibilities.  
 
6.1. Up for (Re-)Election 
Candidates are encouraged to work on the following tasks and responsibilities leading up to 
the elections together with the responsible Campaign Team: 
 
●​ Setting up a personal campaign team for textual, online, and practical support;  
●​ Drafting a personal strategy with campaign objectives; 
●​ Attending campaign calls; 
●​ Being proactive and transparent about campaign activities; 
●​ Arranging transportation to and from activities; 
●​ Increasing visibility and influence; 
●​ Building (thematic) networks; 
●​ Organising and/or attending fundraising events; 
●​ Mapping and managing (possible) donors. 
 
6.2. Final Mandate 
If an Elected Official has decided not to run for re-election, they should support their possible 
successor(s) in their election. This includes: 
 
●​ Starring in campaign events or videos; 
●​ Endorsing and being visible with possible successor(s); 
●​ Sharing best practice on the life and tasks of an Elected Official. 
 
6.3 Coalitions 
In certain electoral systems, forming or joining broader Coalitions (§2.5 Officials’ Code of 
Conduct of the Integrity Syllabus) that align with Volt’s values may be politically necessary or 
strategically beneficial to advance shared objectives. However, participation in such Coalitions 
must always safeguard Volt’s core principles, and independence. Before joining any Coalition, 
the following steps must be taken: 
 
●​ Engage in a conversation with the leading candidate or an official representative of 
the potential alliance; 
●​ Evaluate both the content of that discussion and the alliance’s official manifesto or 
programme; 
●​ Conduct a joint assessment with the EOO regarding Volt’s potential support or 
participation. 
 
If at any point the alliance, or its representatives, act contrary to Volt’s values or 
commitments, Volt should promptly reconsider, or withdraw, from the cooperation. 
13 


 
Officials’ Handbook - 23.11.2025 
 
7. Training and Development  
Volt Academy is committed to empowering Volt members across Europe with targeted 
training programs. Ready for leadership? Running as a candidate? Seeking a stronger grasp of 
Volt policies, or EU governance? Our Academy equips you with the skills, knowledge, and 
confidence to make a real impact in your community, and beyond. Each program provides 
practical tools and clear guidance to help you tackle Europe's critical challenges. See 
https://volteuropa.org/volt-academy for more information. 
 
Next to the training of the Volt Academy, Officials can always look for training offered by the 
body of representation, or by other well-known training institutes. 
 
14 


 
Officials’ Handbook - 23.11.2025 
 
8. Emergency Management 
In case of emergency, Officials can follow the following protocol depending on the type of 
emergency: 
 
1.​ Internal conflict  
a.​ Report to the Integrity Bodies of Volt (see Integrity Syllabus). 
2.​ External conflict 
a.​ Report to the responsible person in your body of representation, and follow 
the advised steps. 
b.​ Report to and communicate with your responsible Board about the conflict, 
and the follow up.  
3.​ Threatening situation 
a.​ Report to the police, and follow the advised steps. 
b.​ Report to, and communicate with, the responsible person in your body of 
representation about the conflict, and the follow up. 
c.​ Report to, and communicate with, your responsible Board about the conflict, 
and the follow up. 
4.​ Data breach 
a.​ Report to the Data Protection Officer at dpo@volteuropa.org, and follow the 
advised steps. 
b.​ Report to, and communicate with, the responsible person in your body of 
representation about the conflict, and the follow up. 
c.​ Report to, and communicate with, your responsible Board about the conflict, 
and the follow up. 
 
 
15 


 
Officials’ Handbook - 23.11.2025 
 
Appendix A: EOO Contact details 
EOO Volt Europa // eoo@volteuropa.org  
EOO Volt Nederland // eoo@voltnederland.org  
EOO Volt Deutschland // eoog@voltdeutschland.org  
​
 
16 


 
Officials’ Handbook - 23.11.2025 
 
Appendix B: Policy Checklist 
To get to policies for problems, Officials can use the following checklist. 
 
Problem analysis 
●​ What exactly is the problem?  
●​ Who is affected by the problem? 
●​ How urgent is the problem? 
●​ Does the problem exist elsewhere? 
 
Volt check 
Volt solutions aim to integrate 
 
●​ innovative approaches instead of old patterns 
●​ best practice from elsewhere that has proven to work 
●​ a scientific foundation 
●​ the potential of digitalisation 
●​ participatory approaches 
●​ cross-border and multiple administrative level approaches 
●​ sustainability and climate aspects 
 
Volt policies 
●​ Volt policies and electoral programmes at all levels 
●​ Volt motions and amendments at all levels 
 
Best practices 
●​ Councils’ and parliaments’ information systems  
●​ City comparisons and rankings (e.g. service-friendly cities) 
●​ Trade journals and municipal portals 
●​ European Urban Initiative 
●​ Participatory democracy instruments 
●​ Real-world laboratories and cooperation with start-ups 
 
Research  
●​ Academic databases (Google Scholar, ResearchGate) 
●​ Studies by foundations  
●​ Studies by universities and research institutes 
●​ Specialist publications on politics 
●​ EU studies and reports 
 
Volt experts 
●​ European Communities  
17 


 
Officials’ Handbook - 23.11.2025 
 
●​ Geographical Communities 
●​ Other Volt Officials 
●​ Policy teams 
 
External experts 
●​ Universities and research institutions 
●​ Civil society organisations 
●​ Professional associations  
●​ Citizen initiatives 
●​ Other democratic political factions 
 
18 


 
Officials’ Handbook - 23.11.2025 
 
Appendix C: Guidelines for specific mandates/ regions 
To come 
 
19 


 
Officials’ Handbook - 23.11.2025 
 
Appendix D: To do list 
​Thematic networks and calls 
​Officials’ communication platform 
​Officials’ database 
​Communication template database  
​Motion/ Policy platform 
​System with all votes in political bodies 
​System with notifications of Officials’ social media posts/ media coverage 
​Information about relevant functional teams 
​Templates of non-disclosure agreements and contracts 
​Guidelines on team hierarchy 
​Coaches and sparring partners 
​Guidelines for voting explanations 
 
 
20 


