Privacy statement.
‘Volt Sense’ also operating under the name “EuroSense” is an initiative of Volt
Europa. This privacy policy will explain how our organisation uses the personal data
we collect from you when you use our website.
If you have any questions about the treatment of your data, please contact
voltsense@volteuropa.org.
What data do we collect ?
For the EuroSense initiative we collect the following data:
●
Anonymous and non traceable data related to personal experience
●
Personal Identification information (e.g. email address only if you subscribe
to our newsletter)
How do we collect data?
You directly provide Volt Europa with most of the data we collect. We collect data
and process data when you:
●
Fill out our data collector via the Sense Maker Platform
●
Subscribe to our newsletter via the website
●
Use or view our website via your browser’s cookies
Volt Europa A.I.S.B.L. I Page 1


What happens with my data?
We store your data through our partner company Cynefin Co, as data processor.
The data is processed according to the Data Protection Addendum of the Service
Agreement with Cynfin Co. We use the anonymous data you provide us with in
order to improve the democratic decision making in Europe and make it more
inclusive. If you provide us with your contact information we will share with you
also updates about the EuroSense Project. Your contact information will not be
linked with the anonymous data you provide.
We integrate Google`s "reCAPTCHA" function to be able to recognise whether
entries (e.g. in online forms) are made by humans and not by automatically acting
machines (so-called "bots"). The data processed may include IP addresses,
information on operating systems, devices or browsers used, language settings,
location, mouse movements, keyboard strokes, time spent on websites, previously
visited websites, interactions with ReCaptcha on other websites, possibly cookies
as well as results of manual recognition processes (e.g. answering questions asked
or selecting objects in images).
Who can access my data?
Anyone may access your anonymous data. This may include national/local chapters
of Volt Europa and accredited subprocessors, as well as researchers, partner
organizations and politicians.
What about data analysis?
We may use your anonymous data in an aggregated way to conduct data analysis.
Volt Europa A.I.S.B.L. I Page 2


What are my rights?
You can always contact our Data Protection Officer and ask for your data to be
corrected or deleted. You may also contact your local supervisory data protection
authority.
Why do we collect data?
Volt Europa will collect and process the data you provide us for the following
purposes:
●
To conduct a citizen science project for overcoming polarisation in society
called “Volt Sense” and “EuroSense”.
●
To conduct quantitative and qualitative analysis. We cannot link contact
information you choose to provide with the data you provided via the
Sensemaker collector. Your data is used solely for research and to inspire
collective action.
●
Keep you updated about our activities, and engage with you at the local and
national level (where you reside, according to the information you provide
us). In order to personalise our communication with you, we may also use
your data about previous interactions with us (such as signing a petition or
donating to us).
How is your data processed?
We process your data for the following purposes:
●
The data will be made sense of and will be disseminated mostly in an
aggregated manner within the wider public, among policy decision-makers,
researchers and citizens.
●
The data will be published on our website in the form of interactive
dashboard and regular reports. If we want to use the story you provided in
such public communication, we will further anonymise your story where
needed, so that your identity cannot be linked to the story you shared.
Volt Europa A.I.S.B.L. I Page 3


●
Broadcasting newsletters: we will use the email address you
voluntarily choose to provide us to send you communications on the
progress of the project.
On which basis are we processing your data?
We process your data based on your consent, pursuant to art. 9.2(a) GDPR. Data
analysis is conducted pursuant to art. 9.2(f) GDPR.
Where, how and for how long will my data be stored?
We store your data on servers administered by Cynefin, Ireland, and by Volt Europa
or our subprocessors. Adequate safeguards and legal, technical and organisational
measures have been taken in order to guarantee the security of your data.
Your data will be stored for as long as you do not withdraw your consent. Upon
request we will delete your data without undue delay, unless we are legally
required not to do so (e.g. due to laws or court orders), or if we are entitled to
further store your data for the establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims.
For the purpose of data analysis, aggregated or anonymized subsets of your data
may be stored separately. Since this data does not contain personally identifying
data, it may be stored and processed after your original dataset has been deleted.
Who has access to your data and to whom is it disclosed?
Your data can be accessed by anyone.
What are cookies and how do we use them?
Cookies are text files placed on your computer to collect standard internet log
information and visitors behaviour information. When you visit our website we
might collect information from you automatically through cookies or similar
technology.
Volt Europa A.I.S.B.L. I Page 4


Our company uses cookies in a range of ways to improve your
experience on our website, including:
●
Keeping you signed in
●
Understanding how you use our website
●
Any additional ways we might use cookies for
How to manage cookies.
You can set up your browser to not accept cookies, and the above website tells you
how to remove cookies from your browser. However, in a few cases, some of our
website features may not function in return.
How can you exercise your rights?
You can always withdraw your consent, or forward a request to erase your data, by
getting in contact with us at any time:
Email us: voltsense@volteuropa.org
Write us: VOLT EUROPA A.I.S.B.L.
Boulevard Bischoffsheim n° 39 boîte 4
1000 Bruxelles
BE 0730.949.438
Right to lodge a complaint
You are entitled to have recourse at any time to the National Supervising Authority
of your country. A list of the National Authorities of every EU Member State and
their contact details can be found here.
Volt Europa A.I.S.B.L. I Page 5


