Provisions for a European Constitution


Table of Contents:
Provisions for a European Constitution
3
Constitutional principles
3
Individual and collective rights
4
Institutions
4
Competences
5
Underlying constitutional concepts
6
The concept of (democratic) sovereign statehood
6
The constitutional nature of today’s European Union and of the envisaged European
(Federal) State
8
The constitutional process to a European (Federal) State
9


I.
Provisions for a European Constitution
A. Constitutional principles
In addition to the six principles guiding the reform of the European Union listed in the
Mapping of Policies — democracy, subsidiarity, efficiency, transparency, clarity, and ease
of citizens involvement — Volt subscribes to the following principles for a Constitution
of the European Union.
➢Republicanism. Volt supports a republican form of government for European
institutions in which
the European people, endowed with a common European
citizenship, are the sovereign and in which the rule of law applies to all citizens
equally. This provision is not intended to force a republican model on Member
States as long as their institutions are democratic.
➢Representative democracy. Given its attachment to individual liberties, Volt
supports a system of representative democracy in which citizens periodically and
freely elect their representatives to deliberate and decide on legislation.
➢Parliamentary system. In line with a long-standing European tradition and in
order to avoid an undue concentration of power, Volt supports a parliamentary
system of government in which the Executive of the Union is based on
and
derives its democratic legitimacy from a majority of the European Parliament.
➢Federalism. In order to ensure an efficient common government while respecting
the EU’s diversity, Volt supports a federal structure for the Union. The EU’s
federal government and its federated state governments share the EU’s
competences and are endowed with rights as prescribed in the constitution. While
initially based on the EU’s Member States and expected to remain largely stable,
state boundaries may evolve following a constitutional process involving citizens.
➢Principle of subsidiarity. As far as possible, competences shall be distributed to
the level at which they are best carried out. While cooperation between the
federal and state levels is encouraged, the constitution delegates relevant
responsibilities and accountability to each level. Where appropriate, we further
encourage devolving competences and associated funds to the regional and local
levels, for increased efficacy and the proper expression of Europe's regional
diversity, including where these regions cross state borders.
➢Primacy of federal law. Federal law takes primacy over Member State law. In the
case of a dispute, the federal judiciary decides on the interpretation of
competences and declares certain laws invalid and, in certain cases prescribed by
the Constitution, State laws.
➢Majority
rule.
In
line
with
our support for democracy, Volt advocates
decision-making processes based on majority voting and is explicitly opposed to
the u principle of unanimity. In exceptional cases, such as constitutional


amendments, qualified majorities may be required, as provided for
in the
Constitution.
B. Individual and collective rights
➢Recognise human rights. Any Constitution for the European Union must include
the recognition and respect of human rights and human rights texts, including,
but not limited to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Charter of
Fundamental Rights of the European Union, the European Convention on Human
Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. These rights shall
be inviolable and inalienable.
➢Respect and protect human rights. The respect and protection of human rights
shall be binding on federal and state institutions. Rights may only be limited in the
public interest, as provided for by law and where the principle of proportionality
is met. Individuals who find their rights compromised will have access to redress
through the courts, which must provide fair, effective, and timely access to justice
for all.
C. Institutions1
➢Legislature
○
The European Parliament shall be the lower house of the legislature. It
shall be directly elected according to “Volt’s Improved Bundestag Method”,
in which citizens provide one vote for a candidate in a local constituency
and another for a European party on a State-wide list.
○
The legislature shall comprise an upper house representing citizens as
members of the States; its members shall be elected by citizens or by the
lower houses of States. States may be represented on an equal basis or
with a small proportionality based on the
population. The upper house
shall be a participant  in legislation and constitutional amendments.
○
The Constitution shall detail the respective powers of both legislative
houses. Each of the two houses shall have significant power to materially
influence the regular legislative process on federal level and has the right
of legislative initiative.
○
In particular, the process for bills to become law shall ensure that both
legislative houses have an appropriate
say, while avoiding
legislative
blockage. In case of persisting disagreements, a conciliation committee
consisting of members of both houses may be convened. If the draft
legislation proposed is not
adopted, the Parliament, as the direct
1 See also the supporting legal part, explaining the underlying constitutional concepts Underlying
constitutional concepts


representative of European citizens, may adopt the draft legislation
by
qualified majority.
➢Executive
○
The President of the European Union shall be the Head of State. The
President shall be elected by citizens or a body of democratically elected
representatives
and
act
as
an
overarching
figure
of
unity
with
predominantly ceremonial powers. The President shall sign legislative acts
and may refuse to sign them if there is a
clear and expressed concern
about the
constitutionality; he or she may send the act back to the
legislature for review or request a ruling from the Constitutional Court. The
Constitution shall delineate a process for such cases.
○
A Federal Prime Minister shall direct the political action through a cabinet
of Federal Ministers. The Federal Prime Minister shall be elected by the
European Parliament among its members. The European Parliament shall
have the right to remove its confidence from the Federal Prime Minister by
agreeing on a new Prime Minister (known as a constructive vote of
no-confidence); the exercise of this right may be suspended for fixed
periods following the election of a Prime Minister and ahead of
parliamentary elections.
➢Judiciary
○
The judicial power of the Union shall be vested in a judiciary comprising a
Constitutional Court, a Supreme Court, and lower courts as necessary.
○
The structure of the judiciary and the appointment process of its members
should be based on the values of independence and accountability. In
particular, judges should be protected from undue political interference.
○
In line with international standards, an independent, non-political judicial
2
council, comprising judicial and non-judicial members, shall contribute to
federal judicial appointments as well as to additional administrative,
supervisory, or advisory roles. Specific requirements may apply to the
appointment of judges of the Constitutional Court.
○
The
Constitutional
Court
should
have
the
power
to
assess
the
constitutionality of federal and state laws. Federal and, in certain cases
prescribed by the Constitution, state laws may be invalidated. The Supreme
Court may be the Constitutional Court or a separate court.
D. Competences
2 These include the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the UN Basic Principles on the
Independence of the Judiciary, and the Minimum Standards of the International Bar Association.


A European Constitution should address the distribution of competences and include at
least the following competences.
➢Principle of subsidiarity. Competences should be distributed to the level at
which they are best handled. Cooperation between the Federal and State levels
shall be encouraged. Unless the Constitution explicitly states otherwise specific
competences, the Federal level shall have the power to decide on the distribution
of competences.
➢Exclusive Federal competences. Some competences shall be reserved to the
Federal level. For instance, the Federal government shall have exclusive
competence in matters relating to foreign, defence and fiscal policy. The
European armed forces shall be under the responsibility of a European Minister of
Defence and under parliamentary control.
➢Taxation powers. The Federal legislature shall be empowered to establish and
lay, directly and indirectly, federal taxes, custom duties, and any other relevant
revenues for the European Union.
➢Constitutional amendments. Amendments to the Constitution shall be initiated
in a similar process to regular legislation, but require the approval of both houses
with the  qualified majority prescribed in the constitution.
II.
Underlying constitutional concepts
The Provisions for a European Constitution lay down the objective of establishing a
European Union in the form of a sovereign European (Federal) State. This Part explains
the underlying constitutional concepts, in particular that of a (democratic) sovereign
state. It applies this concept on the one hand to today’s European Union and on the
other hand to the European (Federal) State as envisaged above. Finally, it outlines the
constitutional process that is necessary for the realisation of a European (Federal) State.
A. The concept of (democratic) sovereign statehood
According to the established definition, a state is a social entity that has the following
characteristics: a permanent population, a defined territory and a government.
In
3
international law, such an entity is considered a state if it is recognized by the global
community.4
4 Article 1 of the Montevideo Convention on Rights and Duties of States adds the qualification of “capacity
to enter into relations with other states” to the previous three.
3 Three Elements Theory by Georg Jellinek (1851-1911), see Jellinek, General Theory of State (1900).


A state is sovereign if it is not subject to a higher power. Such a higher power may be
another (external) state or power that exerts control over the (then non-sovereign)
state. In multi-level political structures, a higher power might lie with a different entity
than the respective state. A state is thus sovereign if it has supreme power over a certain
territory. (State) Sovereignty can thus be defined as the claim to self-determination.
5
6
State sovereignty is derived from a sovereign. In (historical) monarchies, sovereignty lay
with the crown. In modern democracies, sovereignty lies with the people. People can
7
establish a sovereign state by a conscious act, the instrument of which is the
constitution:
The claim of self-determination manifests itself in certain prerequisites that are
constitutive for a sovereign (self-determined) state:
●
Competent self-determination: In multilevel political systems, the division of
competences is key to the exercise of power. Competences are naturally
distributed
among several levels, but there is a maximum of one level that
decides over the division of competences. The power to decide over the division
of competences is labelled as Kompetenz-Kompetenz. The political level that has
the Kompetenz-Kompetenz determines who (i.e. which political level) wants to
exercise which political powers. It can exercise political powers at its own level or
delegate them to another (higher or lower) level. By deciding on the division of
competences, it is competency self-determined.
●
Financial self-determination: Politics cannot be conducted without financial
resources. Thus, for a political entity to be able to act in a self-determined way, it
must have the exclusive power of disposal over its revenues and expenditures
(budget sovereignty) , i.e. its revenues and expenditures cannot be determined by
8
an external political power.
●
Physical self-determination: Political self-determination requires the physical
freedom to do so. If a political entity is subject to force by another power (e.g. in
the context of an occupation or a serious threat), it is subject to the will of this
other power and thus no longer acts freely and self-determined. The ability to
8 See FCC, judgment of 18 March 2014 - ESM, para. 161 (Link).
7 The concept of sovereignty has only very limited factual elements. It is largely a theoretical construct
used to justify the claim of an entity to supreme authority (e.g. in distinction to  other state actors).
6 The concept of self-determination is the core concept in the theory of sovereign statehood as defined by
the German Federal Constitutional Court (FCC), see e.g. FCC, judgment of 30 June 2009 - Lisbon, para. 228
(Link).
5 Philpott/Zalta, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Fall 2020 (Link).


ensure non-interference of foreign powers is thus constitutive to political
self-determination.9
B. The constitutional nature of today’s European Union and of the
envisaged European (Federal) State
Based on the above, today’s European Union is not a sovereign State. It can be argued
that the EU has a permanent people, a defined territory and a government (understood
as public authority). In application of the Montevideo Convention, one can even argue
that the EU can enter into relations with other states as it has been empowered to do so
by its Member States. Thus, the EU has the quality of a state.
The EU is not sovereign, however, because it does not base itself on a sovereign (people).
Rather , the EU derives its power - indirectly - from 27 separate sovereign peoples - those
of its Member States. Thus, the emergence of the EU can be visualised as follows:
The EU Treaties
fulfil the constitutional function of setting up a political entity (the
10
European Union) and they contain classical elements of a constitution (e.g. institutional
provisions, fundamental rights). But they do not constitute a constitution insofar as they
are derived from a sovereign and establish a sovereign State. In this regard, the Member
States act as intermediaries, retaining all their state sovereignty but passing some of
their political powers to the European Union. The EU Treaties are international treaties
(albeit with far-reaching content).
The EU lacks the above-mentioned prerequisites of a self-determined/sovereign state.
●
It does not have the Kompetenz-Kompetenz. Rather, Article 5(2) TEU provides for
the principle of conferral according to which “the [EU] shall act only within the
limits of the competences conferred upon it by the Member States in the Treaties
to attain the objectives set out therein”. The principle of conferral complements
the
principle
of
Kompetenz-Kompetenz:
Where
one
part
has
the
Kompetenz-Kompetenz, the other part is subject to the principle of conferral. In
today’s European Union, the Kompetenz-Kompetenz rests with the Member States.
No power is transferred against the will of a single Member State. It is thus not a
competent sovereign.
10 TEU, TFEU plus annexes, protocols, declarations and the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European
Union, in short, EU primary law.
9 The list does not claim to be exhaustive. However, the listed prerequisites are considered crucial for
understanding the concept of sovereign statehood for the purposes of this Supporting Document.


●
The EU does not determine its financial resources. Rather, it is dependent on
financial contributions from the Member States. The financial resources are
defined in the Multiannual Financial Framework which requires unanimity from
the Member States.
The same applies for the Own Resources Decision.
The EU
11
12
is thus not financially sovereign, but depends on the financial will of the Member
States.
●
Finally, the EU cannot ensure its own defence without the Member States. It does
not have its own armed forces, and the establishment of a common defence
requires a unanimous decision by the Member States.
Thus, the EU also lacks
13
military sovereignty, which remains with the Member States.
In addition, the EU cannot substantially amend its own constituting document (the EU
Treaties) and ensure its own existence without the will of the Member States.1415
The European (Federal) State envisaged by this Policy shall have the constitutional
quality of a sovereign (federal) State. Within the Federation which it constitutes, the
European level shall have the supreme authority and shall not depend on the political
will of its constituent states.
For these purposes, the European (Federal) State shall be based on its own constitution
which gives it full sovereign statehood, including Kompetenz-Kompetenz and budgetary
and military sovereignty.
C. The constitutional process to a European (Federal) State
The creation of a democratic sovereign European (Federal) State requires a unified
European sovereign, one European people. That European people can be the democratic
foundation of a sovereign European Federal Republic in the following way:
The creation of a (sovereign) European people requires the integration of currently
separate peoples of the Member States into a single one. This integration requires a
willful act of each of these peoples to join a (to-be-created) European people, e.g.
15 See Article 50 TEU which allows for one-sided withdrawal from the EU, something which is not possible
in a sovereign State unless the supreme authority consents (see e.g. Scotland, Catalonia); there is no
general right to secession from a sovereign State, neither under constitutional nor under international law.
14 See Article 48 TEU.
13 See Article 42(2) TEU.
12 See Article 311 TFEU.
11 See Article 312(2) TFEU.


respective referenda. With the execution of this act, democratic sovereignty is shifted
from the peoples of the Member States to the (one) European People.16
Once the European People is established, it can, by way of another wilful act, give itself a
European Constitution by which it establishes a sovereign European (Federal) State.
Insofar as this European Constitution foresees the integration of the previously
sovereign Member States into the newly created European (Federal) State, they now
become (non-sovereign) federated states of this European (Federal) State.
The separation of both acts, the integration of national peoples into one European
people and the passing of a European Constitution, would be the cleanest way to
conduct the necessary constitutional process. Because the first act, the integration of
national peoples into one European people, is a decision to be taken by each national
people separately (because up to that moment they remain sovereign and independent).
The decision to pass a European Constitution, however, is a decision of the (newly
integrated) European people.
However, it is conceivable that both acts are conducted simultaneously. To this purpose,
national referenda could be held on a pre-drafted European Constitution, which each
national people would vote on whether to accept or reject. The acceptance of the
European Constitution necessarily implies the integration of the peoples accepting the
European Constitution into the European people and the loss of their (independent)
sovereignty.
16 Even though it was created for a different purpose, Article 146 of the Basic Law for the Federal Republic
of Germany explicitly provides for the possibility of the German people to give themselves a new
Constitution. This includes the possibility of giving up sovereignty and of integrating into a larger nation
with other peoples. (Article 146 of the Basic Law articulates the concept of democratic sovereignty which
underlies the Basic Law. However, even without the existence of Article 146, that right of the German
people would still exist, as it is pre-constitutional.)


