Regulation of Live Animal
Transportation


Table of Contents:
Vision
3
For farm animals
3
For fish and aquatic animals
4
For horses, asses, mules and hinnies
4
For the commerce of cats and dogs
5
For amphibians, zebrafish, rodents, ferrets, minipigs, and non-human primates are
transported for scientific purposes
5


I.
Vision
Volt will strictly regulate the transport of live animals in the EU and ban the long-term
export of livestock animals to countries outside the EU.
II.
For farm animals
For
farmed animals, transport should be reduced, refined and replaced by
meat/carcasses and semen/embryos as recommended by the European Food Safety
Authority1, World Organisation for Animal Health2 and Federation of Veterinarians of
Europe3.
Species and category-specific journey times with a maximum travel time of:
-
4 hours for poultry and rabbits.
-
8 hours for adult bovines, ovines, and swine4.
Journey time by land should be defined in the law from the beginning to the end of a
journey, including loading and unloading. In the case of sea transport, the time spent
by animals on the road and until they reach the final destination (not the final
harbour) must be added .
The export of pregnant animals to countries outside the EU should be forbidden.
Long-term transport of live animals to countries outside the EU should be banned.
Livestock vessels must be approved by an EU authority and comply with the
mandatory technical requirements and conditions.
Species and category-specific conditions for transportability, minimum and maximum
external temperatures, space allowance, watering and feeding shall be set by law.
4 Live Animal Transport: Time to change the rules, White Paper on the revision of Council Regulation (EC) 1/2005, available at:
https://www.eurogroupforanimals.org/files/eurogroupforanimals/2021-01/2020_01_27_efa_transport_white_paper_0.pdf
3 FVE calls to ensure better animal welfare during animal transport, available at:
https://fve.org/publications/fve-calls-to-ensure-better-animal-welfare-during-animal-transport/
2 Anoverview of the OIE’s standards of animal welfare: an new interactive Infographic, available at:
https://www.oie.int/en/an-overview-of-the-oies-standards-on-animal-welfare-a-new-interactive-infographic/
1Scientific Opinion Concerning the Welfare of Animals during Transport, available at:
https://www.efsa.europa.eu/en/efsajournal/pub/1966


III.
For fish and aquatic animals
Water quality parameters will be monitored continuously and maintained throughout
the journey.
Handling should be gentle and time out of water must be kept to a minimum.
Data required to assess the impact of the journeys will be recorded and made
available to all operators involved in the transport.
Live transport vehicles shall be constructed in such a way as to prevent injury and to
monitor and maintain the necessary water quality.
The condition of the fish and their ability to withstand the rigours of transport will be
assessed before loading.
Contingency plans must be in place to manage expected and unforeseen problems.
Sufficient, appropriately trained personnel will be available to carry out measures.
IV.
For horses, asses, mules and hinnies
Maximum journey times and adequate as well as fixed rest periods must be indicated
between the individual stages of the overall journey.
We propose to increase total rest time and cleaning of the vehicle to reduce stress
levels.
Better regulation is a public health issue as we want to prevent zoonotic diseases and
thus future pandemics.
Member States should establish a high-standard network of authorised control posts
and assembly centres solely for equidae.
We propose better staff training and supervision to prevent avoidable risks to the
welfare of equidae based on the EU Animal Transport Guides5.
Voluntary observation by cameras during transport should be strongly recommended.
5 Animal Transport Guides, available at: http://www.animaltransportguides.eu/


Comfortable and good ventilation during transport should be guaranteed (animals
should not travel in extreme temperatures).
V.
For the commerce of cats and dogs
Member States should have a clear set of rules that should be harmonised at EU level.
In addition to species-specific regulations, effective enforcement must be in place to
guarantee legal requirements.
Unclear regulations that encourage illegal pet commerce and trade need to be further
specified.
We recommend an EU common database for these animals.
VI.
For amphibians, zebrafish, rodents, ferrets,
minipigs,
and
non-human
primates
are
transported for scientific purposes
The transport of laboratory animals should be avoided.
Clear and species-specific provisions for laboratory animals shall be set in law,
including litter and container enrichment, temperature ranges, feeding and watering
requirements, grouping and density provisions.
A person trained in the
handling, transport, and care of these animals must be
present throughout the journey, except when the driver or the transporter takes over
the duties of the attendant.
Journey logs should be kept with data collected during transportation.
Guides for good practices need to be translated into all EU languages and
disseminated in all Member States.
Clear and species-specific provisions shall be adopted for the transport of laboratory
animals by air.


Member States shall carry out announced and unannounced controls to assess
compliance.
Geolocation systems should track the location of animals as well as the duration of
the journey and any events of non-compliance with transport schedules.
The reports submitted annually by the Member States on the inspections carried out
shall include a detailed description of the laboratory animals.


