SHINE 29
2024-2029 STRATEGY
Volt Europa I Page 1
Enable
Create
Impact
Coordination between Volt Europa and its Chapters
Registration as a Europarty
Funding that Matches our Ambition
Community-focused IT Infrastructure for all Chapters
Thriving and Diverse Pan-Eusopean Community
Talent Development
Visible European Leaders
New Policy Process
Organisational Expansion
Eﬀective Communication
Compete in Elections
Shape Law and Policies
Shine 29 I Volt Europa 2024 - 2029 Strategy


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Volt Europa is a community, a movement, and a political party. Every strategic action we
take can only be e
ective if it is community-driven. The main purpose of our 2029 strategy
is to empower and grow our community to maximise our impact.
Shine 29 reﬂects Volt Europa's goal to gradually increase its visibility and inﬂuence,
leading up to the 2029 European Elections. By 2029, Volt aims to stand out and "shine" as a
relevant force in European politics.
Using the results of the 2019-2024 Strategy as a foundation, we aim to focus Volt
Europa on excelling at its core tasks.
Enable, Create, and Impact are the three strategic pillars of the 2029 Strategy, each
building towards that goal. Shine 29 represents Volt's journey, starting with laying the
groundwork, followed by strengthening our community, European spaces that stretch
beyond Volt, and policies, achieving real, visible impact.
We want to enable the organisation to reach the goals we have set for ourselves. We
want to improve the coordination between Volt Europa and its chapters. We want to be
registered as a Europarty. We want to ensure funding that matches our ambition. We want
to set up and sustain a robust IT infrastructure for all chapters that serves the needs of our
European community.
We want to create the answers to our shared challenges through a strong Volt
community. We want to create comprehensive European spaces, where a thriving and
diverse
Pan-European
community
in
which
all
members
have
equal
rights
and
responsibilities comes to life. We want to improve our internal talent development. We
want to empower visible European leaders. We want to come up with a new, durable policy
process that allows us to communicate about our political stances and connect with expert
communities.
We want to have a real impact. We want to focus our resources on an updated expansion
strategy where we consolidate and prioritise existing resources while being guided by our
principle
of
“Think
European & Act Local”. We want to establish a professional
communication o
ce dedicated to producing content that is focused on democratic
European integration and shared challenges with a European angle. We want to empower
people to change politics, unlock Europe’s potential together, and run successful
Pan-European campaigns to achieve electoral success. We want to use our electoral
success to shape laws and policies.
Volt Europa I Page 2


INTRODUCTION
Shine 29 is Volt Europa’s bold, transformative strategy for 2024-2029, crafted to bring 
Europe closer to a united, federal future. At a time when political divisions, social inequality, and 
global crises threaten our continent’s cohesion, this strategy outlines our vision to turn these challenges 
Shine 29 is built upon the strategic foundation laid in our previous strategy cycle (see pg. 5) 
while serving as a clear roadmap for the next 5 years. It is rooted in the understanding that Volt 
that transcends them. In an increasingly fragmented world, we know that division weakens us, but unity 
empowers us
Shine 29 is built on three strategic pillars: Enable, Create, and Impact..
Enable establishes the foundation for Volt’s success by strengthening our internal working 
-
Volt agile, resilient, and well-coordinated to drive meaningful change at both national and Euro-
pean levels.
Create focuses on building the conditions for a united and empowered Europe. Volt’s vision 
starts with its people. We are dedicated to developing strong leadership across chapters and 
empowering members to shape Europe’s future. This pillar highlights talent development, 
democratising our structures, policy innovation, and community building, ensuring Volt leads 
by example in creating a Europe where every voice matters. With innovative policies, Volt is the 
them.
Impact is about turning our vision into real-world change. Winning elections is crucial, but our 
vision of a united, federal continent. Shine 29 sets ambitious targets for gaining representation 
can push for structural reforms, creating a more integrated Europe. Through electoral success, 
we will drive our progressive agenda, shaping Europe’s future.
Shine 29 is more than a strategy - it is a call to action for our movement. A call to every Volt member, 
volunteer, and European citizen who believes that Europe can do better. Together, we can empower 
people, reshape politics, and make Europe the global leader in progress. With this plan, Volt will lead 
Europe towards a future where our shared challenges are met with bold, innovative solutions. Together, 
we can unlock Europe’s full potential. The time to act is now.
Volt Europa I Page 3


STRATEGY FOUNDATION
EU-Topia:
potential. We strive to achieve the highest standards of human, social, environmental, and 
technical development together.
Vision: Volt leads by example to foster a united and federal Europe. 
Mission: Only a Europe that acts together can solve our shared challenges. 
Call to Action:
 
Empower people to change politics and unlock Europe’s potential together.
Volt Europa I Page 4
(2019 - 2024 Strategy Process)
Our Identity: European | Pragmatic | Progressive | Innovative | Sustainable
Our vision for
European
society
Ours mission
Our vision for
European
democracy
Goals along
the way
EU-Topia
Only a Europe that acts
together can solve our
shared challenges
A united federal Europe
National & local MPs
in all member states
23 MEPs - 
Volt`s EP faction
EP elections in all 27
countries
Europarty
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
We can only take these steps when we lead by example to foster a united federal Europe
Strategy Staircase


OUR CHALLENGES 
AND OPPORTUNITIES
Volt Europa I Page 5
Improving Coordination Across Volt Europa:  
We’re creating clear rules to strengthen teamwork across Volt Europa, its chapters, and organi-
sational bodies. Better coordination will help us act as a united group across Europe.
Building Credibility in European Discussions:  
debates will improve our impact and reputation on the European stage.
Securing Stable Funding to Support Our Goals:   
To fuel growth and key projects, we’re working to expand and steady our funding sources. 
With improved IT systems, we’ll boost communication, collaboration, and decision-making. 
Advanced tech will strengthen our operations.
Fostering a Pan-European Community: 
Creating inclusive spaces for dialogue and engagement will strengthen unity and empower 
all members across regions, helping us realise our vision of a truly interconnected, empowe-
red European community.
Investing in Talent: 
-
ve our goals, keeping Volt vibrant and impactful.
Empowering European Leaders for Greater Visibility: 
Strengthening leadership engagement will align members and chapters with Volt’s vision, 
Creating Policies to Address Europe’s Shared Issues: 
chances and supporting our vision of an “EU-Topia.”


OUR CHALLENGES 
AND OPPORTUNITIES
Volt Europa I Page 6
Managing Growth Strategically: 
Communicating Clearly: 
Simplifying our messaging will make it easier to connect with audiences and spread our 
vision, building unity and support for our mission.
Strengthening Our Election Presence:
push for a united, federal Europe.
Shaping a Progressive Europe Through Legislation: 


STRATEGIC PILLARS
Coordination between Volt Europa and its Chapters
Our goal is to strengthen coordination between Volt Europa and its chapters.
Achieving this will help us to advance our vision of leading by example to foster a united and fede-
ral Europe. It will improve internal processes, optimise resource use, and maximise our overall 
impact.
-
ties of organisational bodies. Rules that everyone must follow and which shall be more strictly 
support seamless operations.
Registration as a Europarty
Our goal is to register as a Europarty as soon as possible.
Achieving this will help us to boost our credibility and allow us to participate in Europe-wide deba-
tes on an equal footing with other parties. Moreover, registration in the European party register will 
secure a stable source of funding.
To reach this objective, we must develop a comprehensive Europarty strategy, which characterises 
the best opportunities for elections and organisational expansion through aligned non-Volt 
our Europarty status over time.
Funding that Matches our Ambition
Our goal is to aim for a Volt Europa budget that is multiple times larger than our current budget.
Achieving this will help us to sustain, improve, and grow Volt according to our bold ambitions.
To reach this objective, we must create, implement, and maintain a funding strategy built on multi-
ple pillars. Much enhanced and professional fundraising from donors and grants will allow us to 
foundation. Additionally, harmonising membership contributions and encouraging regular dona-
Community-focused IT Infrastructure for all Chapters
Our goal is to establish and sustain an IT infrastructure that robustly supports our European com-
munity.
Achieving this will help us to create a strong foundation for achieving many of our core objectives.
Volt Europa I Page 7
1. Enable


STRATEGIC PILLARS
Thriving and Diverse Pan-European Community
Our goal is to build and sustain a thriving, diverse community.
Achieving this will help us to advance our vision of leading by example in fostering a united, federal 
Europe, while empowering individuals to transform politics and unlock Europe’s full potential toge-
ther.
To reach this objective, we must design and implement European Spaces, encompassing both 
physical and digital as well as local and Pan-European environments. This includes organising 
Pan-European events, listening tours, campaigns, forming alliances, and building partnerships. 
Furthermore, we must ensure that all members across chapters have equal rights and responsibili-
ties, starting with a standardised European section of each onboarding process. An important com-
ponent of this ambition is to further democratise our General Assemblies with members having full 
democratic control while keeping entertaining and engaging elements front and centre.
Talent Development
Achieving this will help us to build, grow, and sustain a strong and healthy organisation.
To reach this objective, we must ensure that our Academy structures are streamlined. Volunteers 
competitive compensation, provide meaningful development opportunities, and ensure that our 
Visible European Leader
Our goal is to cultivate European leaders who are highly visible across all our chapters. Achieving 
this will help us to enhance regular communication and coordination throughout the organisation.
To reach this objective, we must create powerful and integrated communication structures for our 
represent our political real-world impact. Our communication about Volt should curate the best 
aspects of our work across borders.
New Policy Process
-
ges with a focus on increased coherence and growing member engagement, inclusive of geogra-
phic diversity.
Achieving this will help us to address our shared challenges with evidence-based policy.
To reach this objective, we must launch a new policy development process, fully integrated with 
our European Spaces.
Volt Europa I Page 8
2. Create


STRATEGIC PILLARS
Organisational Expansion
Our goal is to grow Volt sustainably to achieve the highest possible impact across Europe. Achie-
ving this will help us to lead by example to foster a united and federal Europe.
To reach this objective, we must avoid spreading our resources thin and losing focus. We aim to 
develop and implement a system of chapter levels, which shall outline the characteristics for a 
chapter to be of high strategic potential, as well as the level of support depending on the respective 
status. Generally, Volt Europa must prioritise its core tasks, with expansion driven by capable indivi-
Act Local" should guide our approach, ensuring we focus on building strong local chapters, provi-
ding them with the necessary tools, and sharing best practices through European Spaces.
Our goal is to run professional, attention-grabbing pan-European campaigns.
Achieving this will help us to be more successful in elections and to attract new members. To reach 
collaboration and unity, as well as the danger of its absence, is central. Furthermore, our communi-
cation must be consistent with our vision, mission, and identity. It is a high priority to establish a 
-
pean policy goals and core topics, such as democratic European integration and shared challenges. 
Additionally, we must ensure that our communication is clear, straightforward, and free from overly 
complex language.
Compete in Elections
Our goal is to have electoral success across Europe.
Achieving this will help us to be able to shape laws and policies.
To reach this objective, we must empower people to change politics, unlock Europe’s potential 
together, and run successful Pan-European campaigns.
Shape Laws and Policies
Our goal is to shape laws and policies across Europe.
Achieving this will help us to solve our shared challenges and achieve our EU-Topia of a united, 
strive to achieve the highest standards of human, social, environmental, and technical develop-
ment together.
To reach this objective, we must empower people to change politics and unlock Europe’s potential 
together, run successful Pan-European campaigns, and have electoral success.
Volt Europa I Page 9
3. Impact


