Volt’s programme for
the European Parliament
2019 - 2024 
 
 
Supporting Document 
of the Amsterdam
Declaration 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
 
Foreword 
 
 
In a time of great political tensions, a group of Europeans from all walks of life
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
decided it was time to stand up for what they believe in. It was time to act; Volt was
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
born. ​We came together to fight for a better society, to express our commitment
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
towards cooperation, and to outline our belief in a shared future. Ours is a message of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
     
 
 
hope, of courage, and of solidarity. ​A message for all to see that divisions will not tear
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
down what our parents have built. Volt was created to re-energise Europe and to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solve the issues we all have in common. Volt offers Europeans a new vision for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
Europe, one that embraces the EU’s common aspirations and that faces its
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shortcomings head-on. 
 
Today, Volt is running for the European Parliament, to bring new energy to politics
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and to shape the Europe we all need.  
 
A Europe based on a strong political Union, where risks are shared, where benefits
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reach all Europeans, and where every person has a voice. A Union that shall be fixed. A
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
   
Europe with a robust economy that provides opportunities for all, now and for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
generations to come. A Union that is an economic powerhouse. A Europe that takes  
care of its people, where children enjoy a cleaner environment, where migration flows
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
are managed together, and where rights are guaranteed and responsibilities shared. A
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
truly progressive Union. 
  
Unprecedented in European history, Volt will campaign for the European elections on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a single, common platform: the ​Amsterdam Declaration​. ​A platform which is both
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
visionary and realistic. Volt wants to ensure that it delivers on its promises, while
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
settling for nothing less than a new and improved Europe.  
 
This document represents the supporting document of ​the Amsterdam Declaration ​and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sets out in greater detail how we plan to achieve our commitments and what the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
financial implications are. This document will continue to be improved in the foreseeable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
future. For any feedback or input, please contact ​policy@volteuropa.org. 
 
 
1 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
A vote for Volt will be a vote to: 
  
Fix the EU  
by 
→ creating a strong political union 
→ empowering its citizens 
→ increasing security and accountability 
 
 
Make Europe an economic powerhouse 
by 
→ boosting growth and standards of living 
→ investing in the future  
→ putting education first 
 
Build a just and sustainable society  
by 
→ seizing green opportunities 
→ managing migration humanely and responsibly 
→ pushing for fairness and equality  
 
 
2 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
1. Fix the EU  
by creating a strong political Union  
 
Over the past sixty years, the EU has grown from a guardian of peace into something much
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
more meaningful. Today, the EU works to secure rights, enhance trade, increase shared
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prosperity, and to protect the environment. However, crises have shown that our institutions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are unable to meet their goals in their current form. The EU needs to be reformed to become
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a federal and truly democratic Europe, led by and built by and for its citizens.  
 
Proposals: 
Governanc-
e 
Establish a Federal Europe with a European Government​, ​headed by a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
Prime Minister elected by the Parliament, and with a President elected
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
by the people. This will create a strong, open and transparent European
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
parliamentary democracy​. 
Why? Despite integration and the proven benefits of acting as one, Member
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
States continue to place their own national interest first and fail to account
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for the general interest of European citizens. Beyond new policies, we
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
therefore need new and improved institutions. This change starts with a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
European Constitution to replace the current treaties and give strong
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
foundations
to
a
new
and
democratic Europe. We call for a true
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
parliamentary democracy, where a Prime Minister, elected by and from the
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European Parliament, leads a federal Cabinet of Ministers and guides the
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
day​-to-​day policy work of the Union. A directly-​elected and ceremonial
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European President will sit above parties and ensure the unity of the EU. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
federal Europe, based on subsidiarity, will ensure a true democracy working
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
for all European citizens. This is admittedly a very bold commitment, as it
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
needs broad support from EU citizens, but it is a paramount requirement in
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
order to achieve real democracy in Europe. 
How? ​Article 48 TEU gives the European Parliament the right to propose
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
amendments to the treaties. According to Article 48.2, under ordinary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
revision procedure, these proposals are submitted to the Council of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European Union which submits them to the European Council. Article 48.3
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
states that, following a simple majority vote from the European Council, its
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
President will convene a Convention to examine the amendments and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prepare a recommendation for Member States. In 2001, the Laeken
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Declaration, adopted by the European Council, established a European
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Convention to draft the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe. We
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
will propose amendments for submission by the Parliament to the Council to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
establish a new convention tasked with preparing a European Constitution
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
for a federal Europe. For increased democracy, we will propose a preliminary
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
revision of Article 48 to allow for the popular election of the Convention’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
members and a provision reserving at least half the seats for citizens who are
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
not MEPs, members of national parliaments, or government representatives.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We will ensure that the European Parliament, and European citizens at large,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
seize themselves of this topic, including through broad public consultations. 
Funding? ​Transforming the EU into a federal Europe will not, in and of itself,
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
incur major costs, although the newly-created position of President will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
create staff and other expenditure, as will most likely the increased powers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the Commission. Beyond its increased powers, the European Parliament
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will remain largely the same. The Council of the European Union will have a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
different structure and trade a slightly increased membership for a stable
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
one (compared to the rotation of Ministers according to the meetings’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
configuration). The European Council will be abolished. Overall, policies and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
programmes of EU institutions will increase, along with the EU’s budget, but
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be matched with a similar decrease in Member State policies, programmes
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and budget; for many budget points ​−defence in particular ​−​, a federal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
structure will lead to economies of scale and rationalisation of expenses. 
 
Enable the creation of real EU political parties. ​Current EU parties are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
loose coalitions of national parties, often with conflicting interests; a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
real EU democracy needs strong parties defending their vision of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
future of Europe. 
Why? In order to promote the general interest of all European citizens and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
strengthen the European political space, we need full-fledged, pan-European
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
political parties, instead of alliances of national parties as we see today. We
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
therefore propose a reform of the Regulations on European political parties,
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
including the possibility for European parties to set up official national
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
branches, with joint financing, as well as the obligation, for the parties
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
benefiting from this financing, to use it under the name of their European
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
party. Campaign material for European elections should be made only under
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the name of European parties. 
How? ​According to Regulation 1141/2014 of the European Parliament and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Council, a “European political party” is an alliance of national political parties
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
and registered with the Authority for European political parties and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
foundations. We will amend this Regulation, under ordinary legislative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
procedure, to create a new legal status for European political parties,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
recognising them as one single entity and allowing joint financing. 
Funding? ​Not applicable: this proposal bears no cost for the EU budge​t. 
4 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
 
Ensure the EU’s ability to act ​by deciding by majority on all issues in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councils. Currently, States still decide on many issues by unanimity or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consensus, making it far easier to block than to act.  
Why? ​Crisis after crisis, EU governance has shown its limits, always acting too
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
little and too late. In particular, the use of consensus by the European
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Council and, often, by the Council of the European Union means that it is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
much easier to block than to act. But democracy is not about everyone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
agreeing; it is about managing our disagreements. This is why national
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
parliaments decide by majority. It is therefore essential to abolish the use of
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unanimity and make it possible for our institutions to act when necessary. In
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
doing so, we move from a Europe of States to a Europe of people. 
How? Article 15.4 TEU provides that “except where the Treaties provide
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
otherwise, decisions of the European Council shall be taken by consensus.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
By contrast, Article 16.3 TEU states that “The Council [of the European
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union] shall act by a qualified majority except where the Treaties provide
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
otherwise.” However, many crucial areas still require unanimity, including
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
foreign and security policy, harmonisation of national legislation on indirect
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
taxation. In practice, the Council also tends to seek unanimity even when it is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
not required to do so and transfers contentious legislative fields to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European Council, which decides by consensus. We will work to amend the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TEU to make the European Council decide by simple and qualified majority
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and remove exceptions to the Council’s default decision-making process. In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the meantime, we support the use of the various passerelle clauses to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
abandon unanimity in the Council wherever possible.  
Funding? ​Not applicable: this proposal bears no cost for the EU budget.  
 
Economy 
and Finance 
Make our economy stronger and sustainable ​through a Eurozone+ budget,
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
a Banking Union, and a full Economic and Monetary Union under a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European Finance Minister who will represent the EU.  
Why? ​The Euro crisis and slow recovery and growth since the 2007 financial
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
crisis have shown the limits of our economy, which is as fragile as its weakest
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
link. Our level of economic integration, including the free flow of goods and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
capital, means that fragilities in one Member State are almost guaranteed to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
spread. A Eurozone+ budget −covering the Eurozone, but also open to other
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interested countries −will finance economic policies to develop the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participating Member States as a single and sustainable economy, including
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
through investment in common infrastructure. Furthermore, we need to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
match our level of integration with the right governance tools, including
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
through the completion of the Economic and Monetary Union −complete
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
5 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
with Banking Union and a truly sustainable Capital Markets Union −under
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
the leadership of a European Finance Minister ensuring that our economic
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
policies truly work for all Europeans. 
How? ​In order to strengthen the democratic governance of the Eurozone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and the accountability of the Eurogroup, we will support the appointment of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a dedicated Economic and Finance Commissioner. ​First as a strengthened
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
role of the Eurogroup President, and then as an individual political position
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
detached from the Member States’ role and dedicated to ensuring the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
economic balance and stability of the Eurozone. The Minister will oversee a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
dedicated Eurozone+ budget. The budget is to be made up of the revenues
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
created by common European taxes including a minimum effective corporate
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
tax rate for all multinational companies. To further stabilise and strengthen
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the economy, we will fully complete the EU Banking Union with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
completion of EDIS, and establishing common macro-economic stabilisers as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
part of the current EMU reform package. Furthermore, we will push for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
creation of a Sustainable Capital Markets Union ​to make our capital markets
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
not only fully integrated but also more durable. Current Commission efforts
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
around determining taxonomy and disclosure standards are a good start, but
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
more ambitious proposals need to be put forward so as to implement
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sustainability across the financial sector.  
Funding? ​The appointment of a European Finance Minister will not, in and of
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
itself, incur extra costs. The creation of a Eurozone+ budget is not aimed at
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
drastically increasing expenses related to economic policies and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
development of infrastructure but at placing a part of this cost at the
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
European level. Revenue and expenditure linked to this budget can be offset
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by a decrease in revenue and expenditure in Member States.  
 
Give the European Central Bank the power to support employment and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
growth​, ​as well as prevent and solve financial crises. ​Besides limiting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
inflation, the European Central Bank’s mandate must be expanded to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
promote employment, sustainable growth, and crisis prevention and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mitigation.  
Why? ​The primary objective of the European Central Bank (ECB) −its “single
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
mandate” – is to maintain price stability, meaning limiting inflation. While
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this is an important requirement, monetary policy should also be used by the
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ECB to further other goals, including promoting employment, sustainable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
growth, and crisis prevention and mitigation – all without prejudice to the
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
ECB’s independence. This is essential to provide more flexibility to the ECB’s
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
work and to ensure its policies are able to respond to the citizens’ concerns.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The ECB itself has increasingly sought to go beyond its single mandate; it is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
1
time we officially allow it to. 
How? ​The ECB’s mandate is detailed in Article 2 “Objectives” of the Bank’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
Statute, in annex to the treaties. Its revision falls under ordinary revision
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
procedure.
When
in
the
European
Parliament,
Volt
will
submit
an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
amendment to the Council to expand the ECB’s mandate. According to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Article 48.3 TFEU, the ECB must be consulted in this process. In practice, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ECB has already worked to go beyond its narrow mandate. 
Funding? ​Not applicable: this proposal bears no cost for the EU budget.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amending the ECB’s mandate will not directly lead to increased costs, as it is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
simply allowing the ECB to act according to a wider range of priorities. 
 
Ensure multinationals pay their fair share ​by collecting a minimum
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European corporate tax of 15% and harmonising corporate taxation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
across Member States. Tax avoidance by multinationals has undermined
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the financing of public services for decades.  
Why? ​In 2013, the European Commission estimated that governments in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EU lose around €1 trillion each year to tax evasion and avoidance, while
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2
several countries have had to implement severe austerity measures for lack
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of public funds. The 2016 Panama Papers, the 2017 Paradise Papers, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
others have highlighted the widespread use of offshore accounts and shell
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
companies to hide wealth by European and foreign companies and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
individuals in European countries and jurisdictions or abroad. In order to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3
ensure that all pay their fair share, EU countries must harmonise tax
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
practices, increase fiscal transparency, strengthen tax governance at the EU
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
level, and continue to push for global transparency standards. Among others,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
we aim for the adoption of a minimum effective corporate tax rate for all
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
multinational companies, so that healthy differences in national economies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
do not turn into harmful competition and a fiscal race to the bottom. 
1 LSE, The Future of the European Central Bank, available at 
http://www.lse.ac.uk/ideas/Assets/Documents/reports/LSE-IDEAS-The-Future-of-the-European-Central-Bank.pdf​, 
Reuters, European shares recover after US tech rout, available at 
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-global-markets/european-shares-recover-after-u-s-tech-rout-dollar-falls-idUSK
CN1NI00Y  
2 “The European Commission has cited previous estimates according to which the annual revenue losses due to tax 
evasion and tax fraud amount to at least EUR 1 trillion. [A report by the Tax Justice Network] estimated the annual 
revenue loss due to tax evasion at EUR 956 billion for the EU28”, European Parliament, The Impact of Schemes 
revealed by the Panama Papers on the Economy and Finances of a Sample of Member States, available at 
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/STUD/2017/572717/IPOL_STU(2017)572717_EN.pdf  
3 The Guardian, What you need to know about the Panma papers, available at 
https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/03/what-you-need-to-know-about-the-panama-papers​,Irish Times, 
Lux Leaks, available at ​https://www.irishtimes.com/business/lux-leaks  
7 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
How? ​According to Article 311 TFEU, “the Council, acting in accordance with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a special legislative procedure, shall unanimously and after consulting the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European Parliament [lay] down the provisions relating to the system of own
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resources of the Union.” The EU’s own resources are currently detailed in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Council Decision 2014/335. When in the European Parliament, Volt will call
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on the Commission to prepare an amendment to the Council Decision and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
any other relevant documents (such as Council Regulation 2016/804 on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
methods and procedure for making available [the EU’s own resources]). We
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will also support, through the Parliament, ongoing harmonising efforts in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
area of corporate taxation. 
Funding? ​Not applicable: this proposal bears no cost for the EU budget. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proposal is not, in itself, a way to increase the EU’s own resources but to
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
change their provenance: revenue from this taxation can be offset by a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
decrease in revenue from Member States. The increase in staff necessary to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
handle the extra revenue and ensure its collection will be negligible
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
compared to the gains made from previously uncollected corporate taxes,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which are counted in the hundreds of billions of Euros. 
European 
Parliament 
Empower Members of the European Parliament to fully represent citizens’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interests by being able to propose bills. As the only directly-elected EU
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
institution, the European Parliament must be given the right to initiate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
legislation – just like national parliaments. 
Why? An essential part of democracy is the ability of the people’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
representatives in the legislature to draft and adopt laws. Despite an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
increase in the European Parliament’s powers, the Treaty of Lisbon does not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
grant the Parliament the right to legislative initiative – meaning the power to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
propose its own laws. Instead, the monopoly of the proposal of laws is given
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
to the EU’s executive, the European Commission. No democratic country
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would accept this limitation and deny law-making powers to the citizens’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
representatives. Giving our representatives the power to draft laws is,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
therefore, an essential step for European democracy. 
How? ​Currently, Article 225 TFEU provides that "the European Parliament
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
may, […] request the Commission to submit any appropriate proposal […]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for the purpose of implementing the Treaties.” This gives the European
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Parliament an indirect right to legislative initiative. Through ordinary revision
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
procedure, we will amend this Article to provide the Parliament with a direct
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
right to legislative initiative by any MEP or with a low threshold. 
Funding? ​Not applicable: this proposal bears no cost for the EU budget. 
 
Ensure that the work of the Parliament is fully transparent ​and prevent
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
last-minute rewrites and back-room deals. Record and publish all votes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
of Members of the European Parliament, and ensure a fixed time span for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
public review of bills before they are voted upon.  
Why? ​While a number of votes are carried out electronically, many are still
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
held by a show of hands and therefore are not recorded – with electronic
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
voting only resorted to in case of doubt on the outcome. This is sufficient to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
get the result of the vote, but not for record-keeping. The due accountability
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of Parliament and of individual MEPs requires public records on their votes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on all laws and amendments, in plenaries and committee sessions, even at
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the cost of more voting time. Likewise, in order to ensure public scrutiny of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
all laws and amendments, and to avoid last-minute political arrangements at
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the expense of transparency, we propose a mandatory 72-hour period
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between the moment any bill or amendment is made public and a vote on it. 
How? ​Article 232 TFEU states that the European Parliament shall adopt
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rules of Procedure. In these Rules of Procedure, Title VII “Sessions”, Chapter
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 “Quorum, Amendments and Voting”, Rule 178.1 states that “as a general
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
rule, Parliament shall vote by show of hands.” When voting electronically,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rule 181.2 states that “unless it concerns a roll call vote, only the numerical
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
result of the vote shall be recorded.” Therefore, only in cases of votes by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“roll call” (Rule 180) are MEPs’ votes recorded individually. In the interest of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transparency, we will amend these rules to ensure that all votes are carried
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
out electronically, recorded nominally, and made public. MEPs must be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accountable to the people and their decisions in Parliament must be known
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to citizens. 
In the same Title VII of the European Parliament’s Rules of Procedure,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 2 “Order of Business of Parliament” Rule 149, on a session’s draft
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
agenda, states that the draft agenda may indicate voting times for certain
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
items down for consideration.” In Chapter V, on amendments, Rule 169.3 on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the “Tabling and presenting [of] amendments” states that “the President
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[sets] a deadline for the tabling of amendments.” In both cases, we will
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
amend the Rules of Procedure to insert a mandatory 72-hour delay between
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
the official online publication of all items submitted to a vote and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
effective date and time of the vote. This amendment shall include necessary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
exceptions (such as the vote on a request to treat a debate as “urgent”) and
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
may lead to other amendments in order to allow sufficient time for the filing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of amendments.  
Funding? ​Not applicable: this proposal bears no significant cost for the EU
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
budget. Generalising the use of electronic voting and recording the votes of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MEPs will not incur substantial costs. The electronic voting mechanism many
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
need to be updated, but this would remain negligible compared to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European Parliament’s operational costs.  
4
 
Ensure fair representation of all EU citizens and strengthen the link
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between citizens and their representatives. This can be ensured by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
implementing the same voting rules for the European Parliament
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elections across the EU and by having citizens locally elect their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Members of the European Parliament, whilst ensuring proportionality. 
Why? ​European Parliamentary elections are the one occasion when all
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Europeans vote together for a common Parliament. Yet, the way we elect
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
our parliamentary representatives differs widely between Member States.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, the European Parliament is mandated to propose a uniform voting
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
mechanism for adoption by the Council. The European Parliament should
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
therefore propose measures to harmonise voting systems across the EU,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
including voting age, election date, applicable thresholds, campaign rules,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and voting mechanisms. Mindful of the importance of promoting gender
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
equality in political representation, we also propose that all party lists for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
list​-based elections be gender-​alternate in their ranking of candidates,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
meaning the list would not have two consecutive candidates of the same
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
gender. For the voting mechanism, we support a dual vote whereby local
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
constituencies each directly elect a single representative and a second
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"party" vote with national lists ensures a degree of proportionality. These EU
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
electoral districts should, as much as possible, follow existing administrative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
borders. 
How? ​According to Article 223.1 TFEU, the European Parliament can propose
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“the election of its Members by direct universal suffrage” through “a uniform
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
procedure in all Member States” for adoption by the European Council.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Failing to agree on a uniform procedure, the European Council has settled
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for “common principles”, and elections must be based on proportional
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
representation, either through lists or “single transferable vote”. In line with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the principles above, we will submit a proposal for adoption by the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Parliament, and later by the European Council. 
Funding? ​Not applicable: this proposal bears no cost for the EU budget.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Should the harmonisation of voting rules require the European-wide
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
adoption of the single ballot (whereby voters choose candidate(s) indicate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their choice on one ballot rather picking a ballot among many), the financial
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
and environmental cost of voting would decrease. 
  
 
4 The European Parliament’s draft budget for 2019 stands at €1.83 billion, of which €139m are appropriated for 
“computing and telecommunications”. European Parliament, General budget of the European Union for the 
financial year 2019, available at ​https://eur-lex.europa.eu/budget/data/DB/2019/en/SEC01.pdf  
10 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
1. Fixing the European Union  
By empowering its citizens 
 
Europeans often feel unable to have their voice heard and to participate in decision-making
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
processes. They often feel left out of politics. By empowering citizens, democracy will be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
strengthened. Firstly, barriers to inclusion need to be removed. Secondly, Europeans need to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be given the opportunity to participate in decision-making processes beyond elections.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thirdly, conditions for public deliberation ​and reasonable debate need to be improved, to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
enable Europeans and policy-makers to take informed decisions. 
 
Proposals​:  
Inclusion 
Remove barriers to voting for the European Parliament by enabling
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
electronic voting​, offering better accessibility of elections to voters,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
including those with reduced mobility, such as the elderly, people with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
disabilities, expatriates. 
Why? Turnout in European elections has decreased to an average of only
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43% across all EU Member States. Part of increasing the voter turnout, is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5
making elections more accessible to all, including to voters with reduced
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mobility. That is why e-voting is a measure to be further explored and, if
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
security concerns are tackled, also implemented. E-voting makes it possible
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
for people to vote from anywhere, taking away the hurdle of going to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
polling station. This will not only increase voting among those with reduced
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mobility, but also and specifically among young voters.
Doing financial
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6
transactions on our smartphones is already a daily business, now let us make
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
casting a vote just as easy and secure. 
How? While in the European Parliament, we will draw up a proposal for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
election of the members of the European Parliament in a uniform procedure,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
therefore relying on Article 223.1 TFEU. The proposal will amend the 1976
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 European Parliament, Turnout in the 2014 elections of the European Parliament, available at 
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/elections2014-results/en/turnout.html 
6 European Parliament, Report on e-public, e-participation and e-voting in Europe, available at 
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/etudes/join/2011/471584/IPOL-JOIN_ET(2011)471584_EN.pdf​. 
For the basic argument on e-voting, also see WebRoots Democracy, Viral voting, available at 
https://webrootsdemocracy.files.wordpress.com/2014/05/webroots-democracy-viral-voting.pdf 
11 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
Electoral Act, and will respect the recommendations on e-voting adopted by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7
the Council of Europe and shall implement its comprehensive guidelines on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8
e-voting.   
9
As the first step, we will target only people with reduced mobility: the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elderly, people with a disability and expatriates. Targeting at first only this
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
group of people accommodates the primary goal which Volt sees for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
e-voting: increasing participation and turnout. This will also provide for a test
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
phase to address security concerns, which are our primary concern. As the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
second step, when security, verifiability and anonymity concerns have been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
remedied, e-voting can be expanded to all voters, in addition to electronic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
voting in public polling stations. 
Funding? ​The Rights, Equality and Citizenship Programme and the Europe
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for Citizens Programme can be used. For research in, and development of,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
e-voting, the Horizon 2020 Programme provides funding. To ensure security
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the IT systems behind e-voting, the IT systems Programme provides
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
additional funding. In the next Multiannual Financial Framework (2021-2027),
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the Digital Europe Programme can also be used. 
Grant better access to public services and facilitate interactions with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
public administrations by introducing an e-ID and creating digital
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
administrations in the EU. 
Why? ​Volt aims for inclusive administrations and an open government.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Administrations are faced on all levels with more complex and rapidly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
changing challenges due to a interconnected society and globalised world.
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
Often, they are not equipped to follow the pace of these societal changes.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Moreover, administrations are still too often procedure-focused and too
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
little citizen-centred. Creativity in civil society is inexhaustible, we should use
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
it to tackle these challenges. It means moving from top-down implementing
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
to bottom-up co-designing, and choosing for an experimental, inclusive, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
multidisciplinary approach. Besides changing its own administrations, the EU
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can play an important role as facilitator for administrations on other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(national and regional) levels. 
7 Council, Act of 8 October 1976 concerning the election of the representatives of the Assembly by direct universal 
suffrage, available at: ​https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=OJ:L:1976:278:FULL&from=EN​. 
The Electoral Act has been amended by Council Decision 9425/18 but has yet to enter into force. Council, Decision 
9425/18 of 14 June 2018 amending the Act concerning the election of the members of the European Parliament by 
direct universal suffrage, available at ​http://data.consilium.europa.eu/doc/document/ST-9425-2018-INIT/en/pdf  
8 Council of Europe, Recommendation CM/Rec(2017)5[1] of 17 June 2017 of the Committee of Ministers to 
member States on standards for e-voting, available at 
https://search.coe.int/cm/Pages/result_details.aspx?ObjectId=0900001680726f6f  
9 Council of Europe, Guidelines on the implementation of the provisions of Recommendation CM/Rec(2017)5 on 
standards for e-voting, available at ​https://rm.coe.int/1680726c0b  
12 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
How? ​To ensure a quick and secure identification of everyone accessing
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
online and digital public services, we will review and expand eIDAS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regulation 910/2014 to facilitate and push Member States to introduce an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
eID, replacing paper IDs with a chip card, and also developing easily
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accessible but secure eID software (eg an app).
Second, ​Volt wants to give
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10
people a means to interact with public administrations and to communicate
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their ideas and worries.  
In the European Parliament, and focusing on best practices across Europe
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and the world, Volt will draft recommendations, in accordance with Article
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
288 TFEU, for national national governments to implement two measures.  
(1) Make public services more intuitive to use and user-centred, and to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
introduce open digital platforms in their administrations through which
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
citizens can actively participate, and discuss their ideas for better public
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
services and policies.   
11
(2) Make room for public policy innovation labs and innovation teams.
This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12
means that public administrations allow users and stakeholders to co-design
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
policies and improve public services (a), and allow ‘iteams’ to develop digital
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solutions to tackle the most pressing issues in a constituency (b). This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
approach draws on capabilities and skills-sets not usually available in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
public sector.  
At the European level, we will use the European Parliament’s scrutinising
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
powers of Article 14.1 TEU and 230 et sequentes TFEU to pursue these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
approaches in EU administrations. Additionally, and to foster exchange of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
best practices, Volt will push to organise a yearly competition on innovation
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
in the public sector, open to both public administrations (best practices) as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
well as citizens (ideas). 
Funding? ​The Commission budget and respective budgets for decentralised
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
agencies can be used to implement these proposals at EU level. To ensure
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the security of ID systems, the IT Systems Programme provides adequate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
funding. Additional funding can be provided by the Connecting Europe
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Facility. In the next Multiannual Financial Framework (2021-2027), the Digital
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Europe Programme can be addressed for these aspects. Funding for research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 Best practices can be found, among others, in Belgium, where ‘Itsme’ software is used, available at 
https://www.itsme.be/en/  
11 The digital participation platform in Berlin, Germany can serve as an excellent example, see City of Berlin, Mein 
Berlin participation platform, available at ​https://mein.berlin.be  
12 Best practices can be found, among many others, in the UK (Gov.uk, Policy Lab, available at 
https://openpolicy.blog.gov.uk/​; the Behavioural Insights Team, about us, available at 
https://www.behaviouralinsights.co.uk/​) and Denmark (Mindlab, Platforme, available at ​http://mind-lab.dk/​), and 
the private sector (for instance, Nesta, about, available at ​https://www.nesta.org.uk/​). Many other examples can be 
found through the OECD Observatory of Public Sector Innovation, Our work, available at 
https://www.oecd-opsi.org/  
13 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
and development within this area is present in the Horizon 2020 Programme.
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The regulatory proposals do not bear any costs for the EU budget. 
Participat-
ion 
Enable Europeans to participate in policy-making through the creation of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
digital platforms and citizen assemblies, starting in the EU. This gives
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
people the possibility to give feedback on legislative proposals, take
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
part in political decision-making and eventually shape the fate of their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
society.  
Why? Letting people participate in policy-making not only brings citizens
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
closer to the European Union, but also strengthens civic engagement by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
making democratic deliberation a fact of the lives of every European citizen.
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The third aim of the participatory schemes introduced below is to add the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
element of proper deliberation into European policy-making. Including
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ordinary citizens – people who have no stake in the institutional setting
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
except
that
they are a citizen – will increase transparency of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
policy-making process and makes political deliberation focus on the better
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
arguments, instead of serving private interests. Participatory mechanisms do
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
not have the aim of replacing representative democracy, but rather to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
strengthen
it,
by
making
deliberation
argument-based
instead
of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interest-based. 
How? ​First, Volt will create a European citizens’ jury ​supporting the European
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Parliament. This jury will give feedback on, and make suggestions for, new
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
laws before the parliament approves them in its first reading under the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ordinary legislative procedure of Article 294 TFEU. To this extent, Rule 59 of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament will be modified in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accordance with Article 232 TFEU to include the Jury. The purpose is not to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
replace representative democracy, but to make it more deliberative; more
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
reason-centred and less interest-centred, by including actors who do not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have a personal stake in the outcome. The jury members will be drawn by lot
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and will be supported both by experts on the subject dealt with as by experts
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in democratic deliberation.  
Next, Volt will introduce online deliberation platforms, where citizens can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
get into contact with fellow citizens and relevant stakeholders to address
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their problems. ​This will tackle the challenge that c​itizens are faced with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
similar challenges, but these are discussed mainly in a national context. Volt
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
will adopt a regulation contributing to completing the Digital Single Market,
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and, in accordance with Article 114 TFEU, to provide mutual recognition of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
national online platforms and to develop an EU-wide democratic standard
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for such platforms. 
Third, Volt will strengthen the European Citizens’ Initiative. It is the only
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
existing tool for citizen participation at EU level, but is not working
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
effectively. Reasons for this are the strict admissibility requirements as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
applied by the Commission, little awareness about its existence, lack of legal,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
logistical, and financial support by the EU, and an overall attitude not to take
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
initiatives seriously. Volt will improve the ECI on these points by further
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reviewing the ECI Regulation 211/2011 of 16 February 2011, and make it into
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
an effective means of citizen participation.
Additionally, we will support the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13
European Parliament debating and voting on every successful ECI. This will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
foster a stronger connection between representative and participatory
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
democracy. 
Finally, Volt will establish a a European citizens’ summit ​to ​engage citizens’
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
fresh views and ideas. This cannot only reenergise daily decision-making in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the EU, but can also foster more rationality in long-term strategies. Volt will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
adopt an opinion to push the European Council to establish a yearly Summit,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
and conclude an interinstitutional agreement with the European Parliament
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to this end. The Summit will consist of 1000 randomly selected European
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
citizens across all Member States, representative of the EU demographic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
outlook. They will debate on a long-term topic, such as migration,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
international trade, social policy, the future of the Union, etc. The summit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will take place before European Council summits, after which the results −
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
taking the form of recommendations −will be part of the agenda. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European Parliament will afterwards also discuss the results of the summit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and provide a reasoned answer. 
Funding? ​The Citizens’ Jury must be integrated as an expense in the general
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
budget of the European Parliament. For the other proposals, the Rights,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Citizenship and Equality Programme and the Europe for Citizens Programme
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are available. The regulatory proposals do not bear any costs for the EU
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
budget. 
Give Europeans a say in how the budget is allocated by implementing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participatory budgeting in the EU. EU citizens should be able to decide
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
how a specific portion of EU funds is spent. 
Why? We want to reconnect Europe with its citizens by giving them a say in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
how the EU budget is spent. Being one of the most successful participatory
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
instruments in the world, it is time to formally integrate participatory
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
budgeting in EU policy. Letting citizens deliberate directly on the budget not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
only increases transparency, but also serves as a tool for educating them on
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
13 European Parliament and Council, Regulation No 211/2011 of 16 February 2011 on the Citizens Initiative, 
available at​ ​https://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2011:065:0001:0022:en:PDF​. Our 
proposal will take into account the current revision of the Regulation, see Commission, Proposal COM (2017) 482 
of 13 June 2017, available at ​https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52017PC0482​; and 
the current negotiations between the European Parliament and the Council of the EU, see Council, Proposal 
9783/18 of 19 June 2018, available at​ ​http://data.consilium.europa.eu/doc/document/ST-9783-2018-INIT/en/pdf 
15 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
government operations, and strengthens the demand for good governance.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
By integrating participatory budgeting into the EU regional policy, we make
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sure that it is practiced on a local level. The projects in the regional policy are
 
     
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
already local, let us take them one more step down from the local authorities
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to the people themselves, and both make citizens actually aware of how the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EU supports them, as well as putting trust in citizens to decide on public
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resources. 
How? ​In the European Parliament, Volt will use the Parliament’s budgetary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
powers laid down in Article 14.1 TEU and its competences in the special
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
legislative procedure of the Multiannual Financial Framework, laid down in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Article 314 TFEU, to include tolls of participatory budgeting in the EU’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regional policy, and specifically in the Cohesion Fund and European Regional
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Development Fund. We will integrate participatory budgeting into the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
partnership agreements with EU Member States on these funds, reserving at
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
least one percent of these funds for participatory projects. Projects applying
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
should meet the specific criteria of the fund, and, additionally, projects must
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
show how they integrate the key principles of participatory budgeting:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
repeated public deliberation with both citizens and local authorities,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
inclusion of the relevant population, and accountability and feedback on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
output to the participants. We will make sure that the EU provides for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
training and support in the actual process by serving as a platform of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
exchange for both expertise and best practices from other projects. A track
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
record of the used processes will be kept. 
Funding? ​The European Strategic and Investment Funds will be used, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more specifically the Cohesion and the European Regional Development
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Funds. 
Deliberati-
on 
Strengthen tomorrow’s democracy with today’s education by teaching life
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
skills and competences, which include media literacy and citizenship
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
education. Apart from knowledge of EU institutions, they will bolster EU
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
citizens’ active engagement in public life. 
Why? Social and economic inclusion are necessary conditions for a vibrant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
and dynamic democracy. To foster civic engagement and social cohesion, our
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
education system needs to provide more opportunities for personal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
development: especially in secondary schools, we need an increased
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
emphasis on learning life skills and competences, particularly media literacy
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and citizenship education. Citizenship education should stress values such as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
democracy, human rights, freedom, tolerance, and peace, and foster skills
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
such as empathy and critical thinking. We need to increasingly reflect on life
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
skills and competences from an international and EU perspective. 
16 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
How? ​In the European Parliament, we will work under the ordinary legislative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
procedure to adopt incentive measures, compliant with Article 165.4 TFEU,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
first indent, taking the form of decisions and regulations, to encourage
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
national governments to provide citizenship education programmes in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
national curricula, while respecting Member States’ responsibility to adopt
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the specific content. Volt will improve and extend the 2013 ‘Learn EU at
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
school’ Initiative.   
14
Establishing the European dimension in education includes: 1) establishing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
key civic competences and skills for students; 2) trainings provided to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
primary and secondary school teachers to foster critical thinking, media
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
literacy, and knowledge of the complex current European democratic and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
political landscape, e.g. through summits and frequent exchanges between
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
teachers of different EU Member States in order for current practices,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
problems, and solutions in Europe to be shared.  
Furthermore, media literacy programmes that would involve theory, a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘learning by doing’ element and best practices must be provided in primary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and secondary schools across EU Member States to foster students’ critical
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
thinking. Lifelong learning beyond school is equally important: depending on
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
the professional area, workshop-style sessions will be provided, providing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
citizens with knowledge on how current EU regulations might affect their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
professional area and how they themselves as EU citizens can have impact on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
these regulations.  
Finally, a European monitoring body should be established that would
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
involve a test equivalent to PISA that assesses life skills and competences of
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EU citizens in primary, secondary, and higher education. 
Funding? ​The Europe for Citizens and Erasmus+ Programmes provide
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
adequate funding. The regulatory proposals do not bear any cost for the EU
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
budget. 
Create real, trustworthy European news, ​by introducing a common
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European Public Broadcasting Platform. This will supply EU citizens with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
an effective means of receiving information. 
Why? ​Dissemination of information is not only a matter of economic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
importance to markets and consumers. Rather, spreading information
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
through public media is a matter of cultural and democratic importance to
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
citizens. Citizens must be able to assess information on the level and from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the perspective they participate in. That means not only the local, regional
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 See Commission, Call for proposals EACEA/18/11 on Information and research activities for ‘Learning EU at 
school’, available at​ ​https://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:C:2011:174:0008:0010:EN:PDF​; 
and Commission, Final report on ‘Learning EU at school’, available at 
https://publications.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/83be95a3-b77f-4195-bd08-ad92c24c3a3c  
17 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
and national level, but also the European level. Information and news are not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
limited to geographical spheres, and so neither should their dissemination.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Therefore, supplementary to national public media, there must be a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European platform to facilitate dissemination and sharing of information.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This will not only facilitate a European public sphere, but also offer another
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
perspective
to
citizens
to
assess
their
information
from
different
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
perspectives. 
How? ​To serve the goals in both Article 165 (education) and 167 (culture)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TFEU, and within the Creative Europe Programme, the EU must adopt
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
incentive measures to facilitate exchanges of information between national
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
news agencies and outlets, by, among other things, translating national
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
content (1), and to supplement national public media platforms by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
establishing a European Broadcasting Platform gathering and disseminating
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
news and information from across Europe to the various national media
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
outlets (2a), and spreading information through its own media platforms
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(both television, radio and internet) (2b). The platform will give special
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
attention to improving knowledge of European culture, history, and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
diversity of it, and to serve as a platform for artistic and literary creation and
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
exchange across Europe (3).  
Funding? ​The Creative Europe Programme, Europe for Citizens Programme
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and the Connecting Europe Facility can be used for funding. 
 
 
18 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
1. Fix the EU  
by increasing security and accountability  
  
Security, transparency and anti-corruption measures are essential for generating trust in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
governments. The EU can and must do more on each of these fields. While Member States
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
invest a lot in security, many resources are wasted due to duplication of investments and
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
inefficiencies. The EU is in a better position to deal with cross-border threats. The fight
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
against corruption and efforts towards better transparency need to be significantly improved.  
 
Proposals: 
Security  
Boost European defence capabilities, ​by establishing a European army of
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
committed Member States, while working towards the creation of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EU-wide permanent forces with a unified EU military command under
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
civilian control. 
Why? Security is a prerequisite for lasting democracy and prosperity. Despite
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
durable peace in the Member States, border States are under renewed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tension and neighbouring countries face continued crises. The EU struggles
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to respond to these new threats and has only had limited success. Individual
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Member States are unable to face these challenges alone because of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
budgetary restraints and lack of personnel. The creation of a single European
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
army, under a European Ministry of Defence and with a unified approach, will
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
allow for the necessary pooling of resources and upscaling needed to ensure
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
our continued security. This would mean that Europe’s defence capabilities
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would be significantly boosted while also generating cost savings compared
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to the current, inefficient situation where national armies in the EU buy and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
own different weapons and defence systems separately. 
How? Article 42.2 TEU states that the EU’s “common security and defence
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
policy [...] will lead to a common defence” following a decision of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European Council. In the European Parliament, via the Security and Defence
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Committee, Volt will call on the European Council to act. Likewise, we will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
call on the Council of the European Union and the Commission to amend
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
existing provisions for European defence institutions −such as the European
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
Defence Agency (Council Decision 2015/1835) or the European Intelligence
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and Situation Centre (part of the European External Action Service) −and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
place them under a European Ministry of Defence. This European Ministry of
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Defence will ensure an integrated civilian command over a unified European
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
military. We will call on willing Member States −in particular long-standing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
regional partners like the Benelux countries and the Baltic States −to unify
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
19 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
their military capabilities. As the benefits of their common defence is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
showcased, other Member States will be encouraged to join in. Finally, we
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will support the establishment of additional defence structures to aid this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unification,
including operational headquarters to streamline ongoing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
military and civilian EU missions, and a EU military academy to form the next
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
generation of European officers. The European Defence Fund adopted in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2017 is a first step in the right direction. 
 
Funding? ​This proposal does not, in and of itself, create extra military
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expenditure but will progressively move them from the Member State level
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to the European level; military expenditure from Member States’ defence
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
budgets will be shouldered by the European Union. Furthermore, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unification of national militaries will lead to major economies of scale and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rationalisation of expenses. In 2017, the EU28 (not including defence
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expenditure by EU institutions) collectively spent close to $243 billion and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the larger integrated military ​−that of France −comprised a total of 378,000
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
men and women; the same year, the US spent $610 billion but yielded a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
military of 2.2 million men and women.   
15
 
Strengthen European internal security​, by turning the EU’s current law
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
enforcement agency (Europol) into a true federal-level police force and
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
granting
it
authority
to
fight
cross​border
crime,
terrorism
and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cybersecurity threats. 
Why?
Since
the
1985
Schengen
Agreement,
Member
States
have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
progressively lifted border controls. While this was a crucial step forward for
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
the EU and remains a cornerstone of the European project, it also removed
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
obstacles to transborder crime. In the interest of addressing this security
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concern, and in order to better ensure the safety of our citizens, these open
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
internal borders must be supplemented with a law enforcement agency able
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
to act on cross-border matters across the EU without Member States’ prior
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
approval. Likewise, the EU needs a single Intelligence Agency to enhance our
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
intelligence and counterintelligence capabilities. 
How? Article 88 TFEU states that “any operational action must be carried out
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in liaison and in agreement with the [national] authorities whose territory is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
concerned” and that “coercive measures [remain] the exclusive responsibility
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the competent national authorities”. In the European Parliament, Volt will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
propose
to
amend
these
provisions
and
review
Europol’s
mandate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Regulation 2016/794), to grant Europol executive and coercive powers and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
allow it to operate, investigate, and make arrests in cross-border cases. We
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 SIPRI, Military Expenditure Database, available at ​https://www.sipri.org/databases/milex  
20 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
will also press the Council of the European Union, in particular its Justice and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Home Affairs configuration, for the creation of an EU Intelligence Agency. 
Funding? The transformation of Europol into a true federal-level and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
autonomous police force will drastically expand its operations and budget.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The necessary expenditure can be partially offset by a decrease in national
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
security budgets, as cross-border threats are increasingly handled at the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European level. Meanwhile, the EU already plans on investing €2 billion into
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
safeguarding the EU's digital economy, society and democracies through
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
boosting cyber defence and the EU's cybersecurity industry, financing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
state-of-the-art cybersecurity equipment and infrastructure as well as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
supporting the development of the necessary skills and knowledge. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proposal builds on the wide range of cybersecurity measures presented in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
September 2017, and on the first EU-wide legislation on cybersecurity that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
came into force in May 2018. 
 
Ensure the safety of the EU’s digital infrastructures, ​by making all EU
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
software open source. This will reduce the dependency on monopolistic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
companies and will make our institutions cheaper, more transparent, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more resilient to data breaches. 
Why? As administrative processes are moved to the digital sphere, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
importance of being in control of not only the digital infrastructure but also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the source code being run is becoming more and more important.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dependence on proprietary or monopolistic software vendors translates into
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
security vulnerabilities and limited access or control over what is happening
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
with citizens' data. It also prevents nurturing a competitive ecosystem of
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
open source government solution providers eventually translating into less
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
innovation and understanding of the technologies being used. 
How? We will actively lobby the Commission to introduce a new EU directive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
that will mandate EU departments and institutions to migrate to FLOSS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
software (Free/Libre and Open Source Software), unless the continued use
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of proprietary software can be justified. To this end, we will also lead by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
example, introducing best practices for usage of open-source software
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
wherever possible, and engage other political parties to follow suit. We will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
also recommend the adoption on national levels and raise awareness on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
advantages of FLOSS software vis-a-vis proprietary solutions permitting an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ecosystem of vendors specialised on open government IT to develop.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Furthermore, we will push for a bottom-up approach in parallel by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
empowering
public
administration
employees through basic software
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
development training and beginning their transition from sole software
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
users to understanding how tools actually work, and use freed budgets
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
previously allocated for licenses to tailor solutions to specific and evolving
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
administrative needs. 
Funding? The sections on cybersecurity and trust, on ensuring a wide use of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
digital technologies across the economy and society, and on digital skills,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from the Digital Europe Programme introduced in the 2019 Multiannual
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Financial Framework can be used for funding.  
Transpare-
ncy 
Increase the transparency of the EU, ​by requiring all EU elected officials
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to disclose their office expenses and spending. 
Why? The European Union is often criticised for being an administrative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
behemoth working from a distance. Opaque processes and incomprehensible
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
decisions lead to a loss of confidence in institutions −the further away, the
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
more pronounced. Volt believes that trust starts with transparency and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
therefore wants to define new standards of accountability, accessibility and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
openness in EU institutions. 
How? ​Volt will push for increased accountability in EU politics by means of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
publication of the inflow of funds allocated to EU elected officials, and their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
use broken down by project/beneficiaries without paywalls and in a concise
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
and understandable manner. The same standard will also apply for the EU
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
budget in general including accessible tenders and providing information to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
citizens what budget was given to which supplier for what service. We intend
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to
empower the European Union Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) to have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investigative powers on these issues. Another important point that must be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
addressed is the lack of transparency regarding the income of EU elected
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
officials. We want to make it mandatory to for EU elected officials to publish
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a financial oversight that includes the wealth of said officials when taking
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
office and when leaving office. Finally, we will establish a mechanism that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
allows constant review and improves the enforcement of the existing Codes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of Conduct and self-regulatory agreements to which parliamentarians and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
lobbyists are held to minimise the grey zone of political influencing. 
Funding? ​Not applicable: this proposal bears no cost for the EU budget​. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EU Anti-Fraud Programme can be used for funding for OLAF and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proposed mechanism. 
 
Protect the press and whistleblowers, by introducing strict guidelines
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
limiting government punishment for the publication of confidential
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information in the public interest. 
Why? ​Freedom of press is an instrument that helps facilitate an open public
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
debate in search of the truth in the European political systems. However, this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
instrument has constraints put on this when it comes to whistleblowing. Our
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
purpose
is
to
realise
a
common
juridical
framework
on
handling
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
whistle-blowing by means of analogical and digital press. Within this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
framework, we support legislation that allows for an approach that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
promotes whistleblowing when it is in the public interest, rather than
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
obstruct it.  
How? ​Volt will urge full rapid transposition and implementation of the EU
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Whistleblower Protection Directive by all Member States. We will also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
endorse the transposition of Transparency International's 30 Principles of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Whistleblower Protection in legislation, and work to strengthen European
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
legislation accordingly. Finally, we will introduce a requirement for Member
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
States to ensure that every public, private or third sector organisation has a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
dedicated mechanism for reporting corrupt malpractice internally, or where
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
appropriate, externally, to enforcement authorities without fear of reprisal. 
Funding? ​Not applicable: this proposal bears no cost for the EU budget​. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EU Anti-Fraud Programme and the Digital Europe Programme can be used
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for funding for the dedicated mechanisms. 
 
Make all lobbying in the European Institutions transparent and monitored.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The registration of all lobbying activities in the public transparency
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
register will be made mandatory, and a strict code of conduct will be
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
introduced. 
Why? ​European citizens have the right to know what external factors
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
contribute
to
the
decision-making
process
of
the
European
Union.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Transparency enhances accountability, provides security to the necessary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dialogue with lobbyists or interests representatives when in policy-making,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and ensures all parties behave in the correct manner. In its current form, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
voluntary European Transparency Register does not accommodate an actual
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
state of transparency when it comes to lobbyists influencing the legislative
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
and executive processes that take place in the EU. We intend to reinvigorate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the discussion on this and dig deeper in the transparency measures to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
increase citizens’ trust in EU institutions. Finally, we acknowledge the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
importance of spreading a healthy transparency culture among member
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
States.  
How​? Volt will work to reform the European Transparency Register to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
include all EU institutions, specifically the Council, making it mandatory for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
all lobbyist and advocacy organisations and individuals. We will also require
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mandatory, factual and motivated entries for lobbyists and advocacy
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
organisations. As a means of enforcement, we will include clear sanctions for
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MEPs or EU officials at all institutions and agencies for meeting with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unregistered lobbyists. To this end, we will lobby the Commission to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
introduce a binding code of conduct for all officials elected to positions in EU
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
institutions including at least the following duties: 1. Publish openly all
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
contacts with lobby or pressure groups. 2. Report any offered gift, favour,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
special treatment or invitation. 3. Refuse any gift with a value over [€50]. 4.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
Emphasise that "Quid pro Quo" scenarios or a personal "Indebtedness" has
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
to be strictly avoided when dealing with gifts, favours or special treatment
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on the individual level. We also acknowledge that a significant portion of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
lobbying takes place on the national level. This is why we will actively lobby
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
for inclusion of the implementation of lobbying rules at the national level.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Moreover, Volt will push for the the establishment of a European
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Parliamentary Ethics Committee as an AFCO Subcommittee, with a strict
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
binding Code of Conduct for MEPs, and former MEPs, to prevent conflicts of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interest, undue influence, and consistent movement between regulator and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
legislator roles, more commonly referred to as the ‘revolving door’. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Subcommittee must be able to recommend cases to AFCO or referral to law
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
enforcement authorities. Finally, we will push for reinforcement of the Joint
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Transparency Register Secretariat with adequate funding  
Funding? ​Not applicable: this proposal bears no cost for the EU budget​. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Budget of the European Parliament can be addressed for funding the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
subcommittee. 
Corruption  Make EU project funding dependent on national efforts to fight corruption.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Member States combating corruption will see their efforts rewarded;
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
those failing to do so will be sanctioned. 
Why? ​Corruption takes different forms in different countries, but whether
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
it's affecting unobtrusive access to public services or fair representation of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
citizens' interest in politics, corruption always places a burden on a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
functioning society and democracy in as a whole. While many EU nations rank
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
high on the Transparency International list of lowest perceived corruption
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(per 2017)
or have improved significantly (eg Greece), several EU Member
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16
States have ongoing or increasing issues with corruption and are ranking as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
low as 69th. 
How? We will work to ensure that EU project funding that is allocated to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
national institutions to be managed should, to some degree, depend on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
national efforts to fight corruption. To this end, ​Volt will amend the methods
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
currently used for allocating EU funds. Countries with high or improving
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rankings should see their fight against corruption rewarded in the form of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
additional funding or more benevolent conditions while funds for projects
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prone to corruption should receive a malus-reduction when distributed to
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
lower ranking countries. We also work towards a system where fund
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
awarding processes for Member States in which corruption is more prevalent
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
16 Transparency International, Corruption Perceptions Index 2017, available at 
https://www.transparency.org/news/feature/corruption_perceptions_index_2017  
24 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
are to be subject to strict expenditure supervision, to avoid misappropriation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and ensure that the funds deliver best value for money. This will create an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
incentive on a project-to-project basis to abstain from corruption as it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
decreases the overall funding available. Finally, we will extend the role of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EU Consumer Centres Network pertaining to consumer protection, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
provide the means for citizens to point out day-to-day corruptions in an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
effort to visualise the problem and create pressure to change. 
Funding? ​The EU Anti-Fraud Programme can be used for funding. 
 
Stop corruption by granting new investigative powers to the European
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Anti-Fraud and Public Prosecutor's Offices, ​and increase the competences
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the European Ombudsman to include examining suspicious handling of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
public funds​. 
Why​? Right now, the majority of anti-corruption initiatives are handled on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the national level. In an ever closer Union it is of great importance that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
money from European citizens is not squandered due to corrupt practices. To
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accommodate this, we need anti-corruption institutions capable of operating
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
at a European level. 
How? ​We will push to strengthen the EU institutional involvement through
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the following following three measures:  
First, we will expand the scope within which the European Anti-Fraud Office
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
operates to include a focus on lobbying and illegal influencing of public
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
actors by pushing for the replacement of Regulation No 883/2013 with an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
updated regulation that includes these focuses.  
Second, we will increase the European Ombudsman’s competences so that it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
can bring corruption-related cases occurring in any of the European Member
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
States to the attention of the European Prosecutor’s Office by amending
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Article 228 TFEU and the Statute of the European Ombudsman to include
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
oversight not only over EU institutions, organs and bodies, but also those of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the respective Member States. We will push for a new system where
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European Ombudsman’s Office leads the office of the National Ombudsman
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and standardise the rules and regulations surrounding them. 
Third, we will adapt the core focus of the European Public Prosecutor’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Office to include fighting corruption in all its forms. To accomplish this, we
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will work to extend the scope of the European Public Prosecutor’s Office by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
making participation in it obligatory for all Member States, and adding
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
misappropriation of EU funds to its core tenets, as well as increasing its
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
budget and extending its staff to cope with the heightened workload. 
Funding? ​The EU Anti-Fraud Programme and the Budget of the European
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Parliament can be used for funding. 
25 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
 
 
26 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
2. Make Europe an Economic 
Powerhouse 
by boosting growth and standards of living 
 
The lack of quality jobs in many European countries is increasingly harmful, particularly to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
European youth. Without enough jobs, room for entrepreneurship and equal chances for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
everyone, the continent will not thrive. Entrepreneurship needs to be promoted and access to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
opportunities made easier. Unemployment should be tackled by investing in education and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
empowering citizens in their job search, and those in need have to be supported. 
 
Proposals:  
Create 
Jobs 
 
Channel EU funds into challenged regions to create jobs, by sponsoring
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
smart and environmentally friendly investments, such as high-speed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
railway connections, improved accessibility and connectivity to rural
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
areas and clean, local energy production sites. 
How?
​We
commit
to
ensuring
investments
in
a
coherent
EU-wide
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
infrastructure system that connects regions, including rural areas, through
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
available
funding
opportunities
and
prioritise
projects
that promote
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sustainability and higher added value for the whole region.  
We will incentivise private investments in challenged regions and rural areas,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
supporting big and small companies that invest in environmentally friendly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
projects. It is important to make available adequate economic resources and
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
human capital to deliver on those projects. 
We support capacity-building in less favoured Member States or regions to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
enable
a
more effective public and private participation in funding
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
programmes that promote eco-innovation, sustainable transport, and energy
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
systems. 
Funding? ​The resources to finance our proposal are available under several
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EU programmes such as Connecting Europe Facility, LIFE, Horizon Europe and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
InvestEU. 
 
Increase public spending on professional and vocational education ​to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
increase lifelong employability and the international competitiveness of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
apprentices. A special focus will be placed on areas with high long-term
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unemployment​. 
27 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
How? ​We will work to increase EU funding for the Youth Guarantee, which
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
commits Member States to ensure that young people receive a quality offer
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
of employment, education, apprenticeship, or training within 4 months of
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
becoming
unemployed
or
leaving
education.
We
will
review
the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
implementation
of
the
Youth
Guarantee
in
tandem
with
national
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stakeholders to eliminate inefficiencies and improve the effectiveness of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
initiative. We will focus on areas experiencing high youth unemployment and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ensure a significant increase of EU budget allocation in the next budget
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
period (2021-27), assessing the synergies with other programmes to optimise
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
allocation of resources. 
We will offer learning experiences for non-academic careers by expanding
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ErasmusPRO,
an
action within the Erasmus+ Programme to support
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
long-duration placement of apprentices abroad. A scaled-up ErasmusPRO will
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
fight unemployment through high-quality internships, traineeships, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
apprenticeships, offering further employment opportunities. Moreover, it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will encourage social inclusion by facilitating access to participants with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
disadvantaged backgrounds and promote multilingualism. To make it a new
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
EU flagship programme, expanding the scope of Erasmus+, it is important to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
improve the coordination with other programmes, such as Youth Guarantee,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and increase its adaptability to the specific situation of each Member State. 
Furthermore, we will promote the improvement of visibility and participation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the European Solidarity Corps, which creates opportunities for young
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
people to volunteer or work in projects in their own country or abroad in a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
wide range of sectors engaged in solidarity-related activities. Participation in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the Corps will serve the dual goal of improving employability and bringing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
together young people to build a more inclusive society, to support
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
vulnerable people, to and respond to societal challenges through an inspiring
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and empowering experience. 
Funding? ​The resources to finance our proposal are available under several
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EU programmes such as Youth Guarantee, ErasmusPRO, ESF+, European
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Solidarity Corps, InvestEU, Erasmus+, and Horizon Europe.  
 
Make it easier to find a job across Europe, ​by setting up a real European
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Labour Platform to match the unemployed and employers across Europe.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Expand the European Employment Services (EURES) and foster better
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cooperation with the private sector ​in order to move towards a truly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
united labour market​. 
How? ​We want to make sure that the effectiveness and visibility of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European Employment Service (EURES) are improved by engaging with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
national employment agencies, employers’ organisations, and companies to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
place relevant vacancies in a uniform and revised EURES format. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
harmonisation will increase the number of job offers at the European level,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
make job seeking easier, and placements more effective. Member States will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
also use EURES to provide information on labour shortage and surplus per
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sector. 
We propose to use algorithms to match supply and demand driven by data
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
analytics, aiming to forecast and react to future job shortages on a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
geographic and sectoral level. The use of these algorithms enables
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
preventive measures to be tailored before job losses occur. 
We advocate for the improvement of the capacity of the European Social
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fund and for the Employment and Social Innovation Programme to act as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
inclusive instruments and facilitate labour mobility by paying attention to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
successful placements of the most vulnerable groups, such as unemployed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
youth, and to the regions most affected by unemployment. Adequate EU
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resources
and
know-how
should be provided to modernise national
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
employment services and help make them more effective, focusing on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
countries whose services are lagging, to enable them to carry out their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
activities. 
Funding? ​The resources to finance our proposal are available under several
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EU programmes, such as ESF +, Erasmus +, Digital Europe, Horizon Europe,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and InvestEU.  
 
Invest in programmes supporting decentralised digital labour, ​by providing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
devices and digital skills training at low costs. Investments will be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
focused on regions with high unemployment rates and with low level of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
digital skills or access to technology. 
How? ​We encourage the development of digital skills by providing financial
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
support through EU resources to encourage ownership of technological
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
devices for low income and unemployed individuals. For this, we will rely on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
national employment services in the selection of those needing such support,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
given that they have a better overview of the local situation and are able to
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
provide trainings and offer tailored solutions to people looking for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
employment.  
We encourage the use of online training platforms and developing new
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
educational tools by working in tandem with universities, training providers,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and other social partners to equip unemployed people with the skill-sets
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
necessary to re-enter the labour market. 
We promote the establishment of a dialogue with the Public Employment
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
Services to create programmes that make use of new tools, such as massive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
online courses, to educate job-seekers on how to search for jobs, or on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
earning a living via distance work through specialised coaches. These
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
programmes would be equally accessible digitally across Europe, making it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
easier to target specifically those not in education, employment, or training.  
Funding? ​the resources to finance our proposal are available under several
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EU programmes such as ESF+, Erasmus+, Digital Europe, Horizon Europe, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
InvestEU.  
Entrepren-
eurship 
Make it easy to set up a businesses ​by creating a European Digital One
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
Stop​ Shop. This will enable to set up a business in 3 working days at
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
minimum administrative cost. To complement this, registration fees and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
processes will be harmonised and reporting, tax filing, and other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
government interactions will be streamlined across the EU. 
How? ​We propose to enhance the role of the European Investment Advisory
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hubs (EIAH) under the European Fund for Strategic Investment (EFSI) to, in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
addition to its role in helping investment-seeking SMEs, act as a one stop
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
shop, helping companies register within each Member State and the EU as a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
whole. Once their role is institutionalised, EIAHs across Europe will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
streamline registration procedures and set up the European Digital One ​Stop
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​Shop. 
We advocate to amend European company law to ​h​armonise Member State
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
companies’ acts. Insolvency laws, currently under negotiation in the EU, need
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to be more ambitious and aligned with each other to allow for greater
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cross-border operations and business certainty for companies. We need to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
create a regulatory framework to improve the business environment for
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investors, stakeholders, and companies. This will strengthen the Single
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Market by modernising and harmonising consumer, contract, and company
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
laws, as well as by implementing stronger non-discrimination and gender
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
equality laws. 
We encourage companies to register, in accordance with EU corporate law,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as ​societates Europaeae (SEs) by increasing awareness and brand of SE. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would enable companies to easily transfer to −or merge with −companies in
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
other Member States. 3000 companies have already registered as SEs, but
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
most registrations come from a limited number of Member States. To create
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a fair and inclusive Single Market, it is important to promote SEs across the
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
whole EU, together with a set of common EU rules on SE and further
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
harmonisation of European company and employment law. 
We will invest in inclusive entrepreneurship education to ensure access by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
those less represented in the field, including women and girls, and those
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facing social exclusion and marginalisation, including ethnic minorities,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
migrants, and refugees. We believe that the way to overcome obstacles
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
faced by these groups is through the support of peer-to-peer connections,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
networks, and best practice sharing platforms. 
30 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
Funding? The resources to finance our proposal are available under several
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EU programmes such as Erasmus for Young Entrepreneur, Single Market
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Programme, and ESF+. 
 
Boost entrepreneurship and the creation of jobs​, by scaling up investments
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in technologies such as blockchain, big data, artificial intelligence and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cloud technologies to help Europe's strategic sectors to compete
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
globally. 
How? ​First we want to strengthen the European Fund for Strategic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Investments by enabling it to be used to fund innovation through direct
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investment, as well as by adopting more risk-friendly rules for its capital. 
In addition, Volt proposes to contribute to the competitiveness and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sustainability of enterprises by providing funds in less favoured regions and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
those of common interest to several Member States for small and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) that re​invest surplus capital in expanding
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their businesses, research and development, training programmes for their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
workers, or creating new jobs.  
Furthermore, we will make access to financing easier for innovative SMEs –
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
those contributing to the transition to a low-carbon and climate-resilient
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
economy and society – during creation, expansion, and business transfer
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
stages. This access to financing should be in the form of loan guarantees and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
equity facilities, improved access to markets, and improved conditions for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
business creation and growth by improving the visibility of financing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
instruments such as the Competitiveness of Enterprises and Small and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Medium-sized Enterprises Programme, and Innovation in SMEs Programmes. 
Lastly, we promote social enterprises, including alternative business models
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
such as cooperatives and mutuals, and we want to ensure improved access to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
financing for under-represented groups in the field of entrepreneurship. We
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will combat harmful practices such as loan-sharking towards vulnerable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
groups, particularly in the field of micro-finance. 
Funding? The resources to finance our proposal are available under several
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EU programmes such as Erasmus for Young Entrepreneur, Single Market
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Programme, ESF+, InvestEU, Digital Europe, Horizon Europe, and LIFE. 
31 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
No One 
Left Behind 
Ensure decent living standards, by adopting a minimum income above
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
poverty level in all Member States. 
How? ​In order to truly implement the principle of the European Pillar of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Social Rights, which affirms that “everyone lacking sufficient resources has
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the right to adequate minimum income benefits ensuring a life in dignity at
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
all stages of life, and effective access to enabling goods and services,” it is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
necessary that social rights become a core element of the employment policy
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
guidelines determined through the European Semester, a yearly cycle of
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
policy coordination. We will ensure that the every principle of the Pillar is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
adopted and put in place in all Member States. 
We propose to optimise the economic resources to ensure that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
appropriate funds focus on social inclusion in all countries. This will enable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Member States to fund projects, in accordance with their needs, to provide
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
minimum income, bringing people and families out of poverty, and providing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
them with adequate living conditions. 
To face the radical changes happening in society and on the labour market,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
we need to be bold while offering solutions. For this reason, we propose to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
test new models of social protection, such as Universal Basic Income (UBI). To
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understand the impact of UBI as a policy instrument, we need well-designed
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
large-scale pilot programmes run by local or national institutions under the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
overall guidance of the EU, which will be essential to design the pilot
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
projects, monitor them, and evaluate the results. Therefore, we commit to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
create
an
High
Level
Group
of
experts,
composed
of
government
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
representatives from the Member States, EU Parliament and Commission
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
representatives, as well as representatives from the Committee of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regions, academics, social partners and other relevant stakeholders to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conduct an in-depth analysis on UBI to design and provide a solid action plan
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
to implement. To start with, the UBI should be tested in 5 diverse localities in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
Europe with at least 10,000 participants, for a period of at least 5 years.  
Funding? The resources to finance our proposal are available under several
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EU programmes such as ESF+, European Regional Development Fund. 
 
Support people who lost their jobs in sectors or regions affected by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
economic crises​, by doubling the funding of the European Globalisation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Adjustment Fund and making it more flexible. These mechanisms will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
make the transition toward new jobs easier when a company ceases
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
operations due to economic difficulties or moves outside the EU. 
How? ​We want to simplify and make more comprehensive the European
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Globalisation Adjustment Fund, enabling it to support workers who lost their
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
jobs and provide them with the means to re-join the labour market.  
32 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
We will explore the Fund’s synergies with already available resources to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
provide financial support and training in time of crisis, while assessing the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
single requests. To achieve this objective, it is fundamental to involve EU
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
institutions, Member States, and local authorities in the process, as well as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
representatives of both workers and employers. 
Funding? Resources will come from the European Globalisation Adjustment
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fund, activated together with the European Social Fund Plus, and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European Regional Development Fund, to optimise the synergies offered by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
these funds. 
 
 
33 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
2. Make Europe an Economic 
Powerhouse 
by investing in the future 
 
The world economy is undergoing major transformations, resulting in both opportunities and
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
challenges for the continent. Europe needs to lead by example when it comes to the future of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
work, sustainability, competitiveness, and ​wellbeing. To this end, it is crucial for Europe to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
develop its research and innovation capacities. Amongst all technological developments to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
come, artificial intelligence is expected to be the most disruptive; Europe needs to be at the
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
forefront of exploring its future potential.  
 
Proposals​: 
Innovation 
 
Ensure European excellence in the future by doubling expenditure on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Research and Development to 4% of EU GDP by 2025. ​Urge countries to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
invest in innovation to master the environmental and social challenges
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of tomorrow. 
Why​? Research and technological progress is the foundation of our high
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
standard
of
living.
To
guarantee
our
future
well​being
and
remain
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
competitive with traditional powers such as the USA and Japan, and rising
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
powers such as China and India, our European and national research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
programmes need to be intensified, and spending must be increased
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
substantially.  
How? ​Centralised EU level R&I funding, through the Research Framework
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Programmes in the Multiannual Financial Framework, fosters international
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
collaboration and competition, pushing research quality beyond levels that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
individual Member States can attain and reducing duplication of efforts.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Therefore, we advocate to increase spending on research and innovation to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reach 160 bn for the next Research Framework Programme, named Horizon
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Europe.
We also need to increase R&I funding outside the Multiannual
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17
Financial Framework through public-private partnerships by ramping up
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investments on fit-for-purpose initiatives, such as the Joint Undertakings or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the Flagship Initiatives, to more flexibly address urgent research topics and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
objectives. We aim to better align EU and national R&I investments to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17 In line with recommendations made in the Report of the Independent High Level Group on maximising the 
impact of EU Research & Innovation Programmes. See European Commission, Investing in the European Future we 
want, available at 
http://ec.europa.eu/research/evaluations/pdf/archive/other_reports_studies_and_documents/hlg_2017_report.pd
f  
34 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
effectively concentrate research efforts and increase efficiency. This includes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
simplifying the EU funding landscape, developing a common strategic R&I
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
agenda for the European Research Area, especially focused on topics with EU
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
added value, increasing the role of the Joint Research Centres, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
encouraging Member States to develop multiannual national R&I strategies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that complement the common agenda. Moreover, we believe it is possible to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
better capitalise on ideas and translate more research into innovation by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
improving the entrepreneurial ecosystems in national and regional tech
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
parks
through
(regulatory)
policy
experimentation
and
funding
of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Operational Programmes dealing with competitiveness and innovation.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Finally, we want to incentivise private R&I investments and industry
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investments that translate university/public research into innovation by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
encouraging
Member
States
to
put
in
place
R&D
tax
credits
for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
university-industry
collaboration
and co-funding. Incentives should be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
targeted
towards
startups
and
companies
not
affiliated
with
large
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
corporations, and investments which rely on EU funding should also be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
eligible for such tax credits. Eventually, we aim to develop a comprehensive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
EU fiscal policy on R&I that still allows Member States and regions to address
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
local need.  
Funding? The resources to finance our proposal are mainly available under
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Horizon Europe. 
 
Become smart in Artificial Intelligence, ​by creating the EU High Level
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Artificial Intelligence Coordination Office to gather the best minds and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
businesses in the field, set up a European AI Initiative, and establish high
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
ethical standards for AI. 
How? ​Artificial Intelligence development calls for a European AI Initiative: i)
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
to gain critical mass to compete globally, as no individual national initiative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by itself can keep up with the competition from other key player, such as the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
US or China, ii) to ensure AI technology is built in Europe and based on EU’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Human Values, and iii) to prepare for undesirable effects of AI, such as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
involuntary unemployment. 
To achieve this, we will work to ensure adequate funding for the European AI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Initiative, including for the High Level AI Office, and support the European
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Commission in its announced AI Research and Development Initiative. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
includes a budget target of €20 billion per year by 2020 for supporting
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
multi-national efforts. 
Funding? The resources to finance our proposal are available under several
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EU programmes such as Digital Europe, InvestEU and Horizon Europe 
 
35 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
Make Artificial Intelligence available and accessible for everyone, ​by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
increasing the European Investment Bank’s support for AI investments
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to at least €1 billion a year by 2020, and by setting up a centralised
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
“AI-on-demand-platform” to provide a single access point to key AI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resources in the EU. 
How? ​We want to make AI available and accessible by creating an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“AI-on-demand-platform” to provide a publicly funded European access point
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
for AI developers and businesses to knowledge, data, and computing power
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
needed to compete with global actors. To implement the platform, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European Commission can build on the existing network of more than 400
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Digital Innovation Hubs.  
We will work to attract private investments in AI, including by increasing the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European Investment Bank’s support for AI investments to at least €1 billion
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a year after 2020, and by rolling out the Pan-European Venture Capital
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fund-of-Funds Programme – Venture EU – a €2.1 billion fund to boost
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investment in innovative start-up and scale-up companies across Europe. 
Funding? The resources to finance our proposal are available under several
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EU programmes such as Digital Europe, InvestEU and Horizon Europe 
Future of 
Work 
Protect the dignity and safety of workers, especially in new sectors.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Provide workers with non-traditional long-term contracts (e.g. gig,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
platform, freelance) with standards of protection comparable to those
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
applicable to traditional forms of work. 
How?
​A
growing
number
of
workers
in
flexible
or unstable work
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
arrangements are not adequately covered by social security, and face a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
higher risk of poverty. Massive changes in labour markets compounded by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the emergence of new models of work make it imperative to adjust
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mechanisms of social protection built around shrinking traditional forms of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
employment. We will support Member States to reform its social security
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
schemes to close formal coverage gaps, so that non-standard workers and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the self-employed across Europe enjoy guaranteed minimum protection
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
standards
for
unemployment,
sickness
and
healthcare,
maternity
or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
paternity, accidents at work and occupational diseases, disability, and old
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
age. We will do so through the results of the social scoreboard and a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
punctual implementation of the Employment Guidelines, which provide the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
basis for country-specific recommendations arising from the European
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Semester, the yearly cycle of policy coordination. 
To avoid unfair competition, especially between online and offline jobs, we
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will put in place EU-wide schemes, defined with the support of European
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
social partners, to create a level playing field to ensure that countries
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
36 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
respect the same obligations regarding workers’ access to social protection,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regardless of their status as employees or self-employed. 
Funding? Due to the fact that we call for the cooperation of the Social
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Partner, budget lines for the European Social Dialogue can be used to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conduct studies and share best practices. 
 
Create flexible workplaces via an EU-wide Working Time Choice Act​,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
enabling workers and employers to negotiate flexible forms of work that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reflect the needs of the individual, the team, and the business. 
How? ​We will encourage social dialogue in the form of consultation and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
negotiation between social partners. Collective agreements at a sectoral
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
level are generally the best way to strengthen the negotiation position of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
workers, and they support micro-businesses as well as SMEs, which rely on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
such agreements when they lack internal capacity, personnel, or know-how
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to conduct negotiations at company level. 
We will create a supportive environment for company-level agreements,
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
making flexible workplaces and times possible in accordance with the needs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of all involved. This will be achieved by drafting a European Working Time
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
Choice Act through a multi-sector consultation involving all social partners
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
(workers, employers, governments, and civic organisations) who have a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
specific focus, such as on family and health, at the national and EU level.  
Given the variety of worker preferences, company needs, and national
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
circumstances, it is becoming difficult to develop uniform regulations for all
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
possible situations. Instead, Working Time Choice policies aim at ‘Regulated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Self-regulation’, providing the legal boundaries and basic protections, but
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
empowering social partners in their search for balanced solutions to specific
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
situations.  
Funding?​ Not applicable: this proposal bears no cost for the EU budget. 
 
Prepare the European labour force for the challenges of tomorrow, by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reforming and adapting the European Sector Skills Council to research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the skills needed in the future. This will enhance synergies between
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
private and public sector. 
How? ​We will promote the reformation and the adaptation of the existing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European Sector Skills Councils to acquire and understand skills required in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
each sector, attempting to anticipate the impact of the unfolding Fourth
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Industrial Revolution. Cross-country cooperation at present is rare and EU
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
level Sector Councils will boost the effectiveness of national councils and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have a positive impact on the responsiveness of education systems to future
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
labour market needs. To make sure this common strategy is effective, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
37 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
Councils should consist of representatives of national and European social
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
partners, guaranteeing that the results reach workers and employers across
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Europe. 
Councils will have an advisory role for national and European policy makers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as well as for companies and workers regarding the labour market, skills
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
development, vocational training, and upskilling. The Councils will formulate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
recommendations on how to better use resources from existing EU
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
programmes to make financing of the agreed measures easier for workers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and companies. 
We will initiate a Work 4.0 public consultation process at the European level
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to explore changing basic values concerning work across Europe, and to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
inform policy formulation at  the EU and Member State level. 
Funding? The resources to finance our proposal are available under
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Erasmus+ and for complementary actions ESF+. 
 
 
38 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
2. Make Europe an Economic 
Powerhouse  
by putting education first 
  
For Europe to reach its full potential, the education of its citizens must be a core priority.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Education allows for the creation and sharing of knowledge, which enhances both mutual
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understanding and social cohesion. Volt wants to upgrade education from an early age duty
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to a lifelong companion, while improving the learning of formal and informal skills and their
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
recognition across Europe. This will ensure citizens stay employed and find better suited jobs. 
 
Proposals 
Education 
Enable
more
people
to
experience
different
European
countries,
by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
increasing the budget for EU exchange programmes (Erasmus+), especially
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for secondary school students, apprentices and disadvantaged students. 
Why? ​The integrative effects of Erasmus needs to be made reproducible on a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
larger scale, and must be accessible to all children and students in Europe. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
way, we will create the roots and fabric of a European society that includes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
everyone. ​Mobility under the Erasmus 2021-2027 Programme is projected to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
increase threefold to reach 12 million people. Until now, ​the Erasmus
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
programme has mostly benefited university students growing up in an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
international context, while other groups have found themselves excluded
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from this experience. ​New mobility opportunities must therefore especially be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
targeted at individuals who traditionally have made limited use of mobility
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
opportunities. 
How? ​Volt will target financial support for mobility, pushing for an increased
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
focus on secondary schools, disadvantaged students and schools, opportunities
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for learning-on-the-job in the years beyond formal vocational education and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
through apprenticeships, as well as on the expansion of the Voluntary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European Service. Moreover, we will improve information dissemination on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Erasmus opportunities through better collaboration by the DG for Education
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and Culture with national and regional institutions. This will bolster outreach
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
towards regions, schools, and demographics that have so far been underserved
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by the Erasmus Programme. Finally, we will extend the Erasmus programme
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and its budget to connect primary and secondary schools throughout Europe
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with the aim of facilitating at least one week of cross-border school experience
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for every student by 2025. 
39 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
Funding? ​Resources can be found under Erasmus+ and possibly also under
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ESF+. 
 
Make sure that everyone can keep up with a rapidly evolving society, ​by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
extending lifelong learning to all, throughout their professional and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
personal lives. 
Why? Volt values education as the good that enables personal fulfillment,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
social inclusion, and employability. Because educated citizens contribute to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dynamic, well-functioning societies, the availability of quality education to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
everyone throughout their lives must be acknowledged as one of the key
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
factors to ensure a vibrant, inclusive and demanding democracy.  
How? We advocate for ubiquitous and free (online) learning by investing −
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
including within the Erasmus 2021-2027 Framework −in educational capacity
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
and strategic partnerships for digital, personalised learning. This will be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitated independently of school infrastructures or the number of teachers.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We will develop EU-wide standards for accreditation and mutual recognition of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
online coursework, while providing guidelines for educational institutions in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Member States to roll out accredited online courses. Finally, we will expand the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Digital Education Action Plan beyond learning in schools and formal education,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and push for it to include provisions for citizens of all ages in accordance with
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the Digital Competence Framework for Citizens. The quick adoption of new
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technologies
has
substantial
potential
to
increase
general
well-being.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, the rapid pace of technological development requires that we enable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
citizens to follow along this path and continuously update their digital skills
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and competences in order to reap the benefits of technological progress, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
not be left behind. 
Funding? ​Resources can be found under Erasmus+, ESF+, InvestEU, and Digital
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Europe. 
 
Bring education to the next level​, by increasing EU funding for teachers,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
introducing new teaching methods and facilities. This will adequately
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
address how different students learn best and enhance their educational
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
success. 
Why? School environments have a crucial and long-lasting impact on childhood
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
development and the ability to thrive in life. To create the right school
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
environment we require successful schooling systems, which safeguard
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
socio-economic disadvantaged students, implement prevention-practices in
 
 
 
 
 
 
(pre-)primary education, and provide schools with the adequate tools and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
flexibility to adapt to the diversity of the school’s students and the talents of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
its teachers. 
40 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
How? ​Volt will assure that enough EU funding that schools and students in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
weak economic regions/cities can apply for to improve the state of school
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
infrastructure and teaching materials, such as IT equipment, high speed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
internet
connectivity,
sports
equipment,
and
libraries.
Moreover,
our
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
educational systems need to be innovated to deliver the best quality
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
education. To drive innovation, we will work to d​edicate EU funding under
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Horizon Europe for more research into educational innovation that puts larger
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
emphasis on socio-emotional development and skills such as perseverance,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conscientiousness, and self-control. Second, we will boost EU-wide innovation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in teaching methods by providing guidelines and sharing best practices for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
increased emphasis on fostering creativity and learning skills and competences
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in school curricula such as oral communication, public speaking, and written
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
skills. Third, we will formulate new EU standards, as an alternative for PISA, to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
evaluate educational quality and student ability that better incorporate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pedagogical insights on child development and socio-emotional competences.  
Moreover, Volt will work create new and adequate tools, such as benchmarks,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
together with relevant stakeholders, to provide children with healthier diets by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
defining and enforcing a standard for healthy meals in schools, supporting
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
schools in creating or improving cantines, involving school children in meal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
preparations and aiming to provide one state-sponsored (warm) lunch per day
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by 2025 for children growing up in families with an income that lies below the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
poverty line. ​Finally, we will push to enable all secondary school students
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
across Europe to achieve English fluency by funding teacher training and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
English language programmes.  
Funding? ​Resources can be found under Horizon Europe, ESF +, InvestEU and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Digital Europe. 
The Volta 
Programme  
Establish the EU “Volta Programme” ​which will provide comprehensive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
financial support for all training activities, including the reskilling and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
upskilling of people. 
How? ​Volt will work to create the new “Volta Programme”, which, in the long
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
term, will regroup and optimise resources, and build on already established
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
good practices. The main aim of the Programme will be to encourage lifelong
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
learning by supporting programmes dedicated to the reskilling and upskilling
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of workers. To enhance continued employability in a knowledge-based
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
environment, these programmes need to work in an anticipatory manner and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be made accessible in particular to workers who are still employed, but in jobs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which might become obsolete in the short- and medium-term.  
To be able to be up and running in the shortest possible time, before the full
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
programme has been established, this initiative will make innovative use of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European initiatives already in place as a jumping-off point, while ensuring that
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
41 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
resources are invested in line with our comprehensive and ambitious training
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
programme. 
We will promote lifelong learning programmes which are essential to provide
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
workers those skills which can increase their re-employability by all means
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
available, enhancing their chance of staying employed while jobs and job
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
requirements are undergoing constant changes in a fast developing labour
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
market. 
We will work with the European social partners to encourage framework
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
agreement to provide employees with time – a minimum number of days per
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
year – and resources for professional development of skills, strengthening
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
long-term employability. 
We will involve research institutions and universities to further develop
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
algorithms and easy-to-use tools to support employment services and career
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
counsellors, using the most accurate available data and information on career
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
paths and skills required through pilot projects proposed by the European
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Parliament. 
We will encourage adult learning by facilitating and creating opportunities to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
connect colleges with universities, as well as a range of European associations,
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
networks, and labour organisations, in order to develop solutions such as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
online courses to obtain a degree, improve employability, or simply enrich
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
themselves and boost wellbeing in an innovative way that can meet the needs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of all workers and that can fit into their daily schedule.  
Funding? In the long term, we will propose to adopt a Regulation to establish
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
the new “Volta Programme.” In the short term, the resources that will be used
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can be found under Erasmus+, Digital Europe, Invest Eu, ESF+. 
 
Make it easier to study and work anywhere in Europe​, by increasing the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transparency and recognition of knowledge, skills, and competences. 
How? ​We will ensure that the e-card for professions, a simplified procedure for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
providers of business and construction services to complete administrative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
formalities
required
to
provide
services abroad, is adopted and fully
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
implemented, making it easier for professionals to have their qualifications
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
recognised in all EU countries, by making sure the Parliament adopts its
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
position and finds an acceptable compromise with the Council.  
Furthermore, we will build upon the work done on the validation of informal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
learning, to ensure that no effort put into enhancing professional skills is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
wasted. The final objective is to build a shared scheme, recognised in all EU
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Member States. To facilitate this, we will organize a campaign, asking for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
support of the European Commission, to increase awareness on this topic,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
involving Member States representatives and the social partners both at
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European and at national level.  
Funding?​ Not applicable: this proposal bears no cost for the EU budget. 
 
Increase the focus on digital literacy for all ages​, by starting online
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
education and coding at an early age, by introducing life​long learning and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
vocational
trainings,
and
by
emphasising
mental health and social
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
well​being in digital environments. 
How? ​We commit to include digital literacy in education for all ages. Digital
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
literacy education has to start at an early age and continue in the context of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
vocational training, in ICT curricula, and in lifelong learning initiatives such as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the Volta Programme. Especially for early ages, digital literacy should be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accompanied by logical and rational thinking, in order to ensure that they
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understand all the implication of digital technologies.  
Volt promotes behaviours and skills that lead to a healthy and sustainable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
lifestyle, safeguarding mental health and social well-being in a digital
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
environment, in addition to technical competences such as coding. 
We propose to use tech education as a tool for social inclusion. To this end, we
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will expand on best-practice public and civil society initiatives to empower
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
under-represented or marginalised groups in the digital field, with a special
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
focus on closing the gender gap with initiatives such as the Women in Science
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and Engineering. 
Funding? The resources to finance our proposal are available under several EU
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
programmes, such as ESF+ and Digital Europe 
 
 
 
 
43 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
 
3. Build a just and sustainable 
society 
by managing migration humanely and responsibly 
 
The EU is undergoing a political crisis in its management of migration flows. Undoubtedly, the
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
refugee crisis is a political crisis. Europe has a legal and moral responsibility to help, it has the
 
     
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
capacity to absorb refugee flows, and Volt will turn this into opportunities for everyone.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Accommodating a diverse group of labour migrants into the European labour market can
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
contribute to both the welfare of European countries and that of the migrants’ home
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
countries.  
 
Proposals: 
asylum-seek
ers
and
 
 
Refugees 
Manage refugee flows from outside the EU, by setting up a Unified EU
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Refugee
System.
The
Dublin
System
must
be
reformed
and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
complemented by a settlement scheme which provides for penalties and
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sanctions against States refusing to fulfil their responsibility. 
Why? Over the past years, European countries have shown that, individually,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
they are not up to the task of managing refugee flows. Left alone, some
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
countries have been disproportionately affected and overwhelmed with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
responsibilities
related
to
migration.
Consequentially,
migrants
have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
suffered. We believe that European countries have a moral and historic
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
responsibility to ensure that asylum-seekers and refugees are treated in a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
humane and fair manner. European countries are well and able to manage
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
refugee influxes when they join their efforts to work together and fully
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
employ the resources available.  
How​? We will push to move the responsibility for the management of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
refugees to the European level, as far as possible in the absence of exclusive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EU competence. We will propose minimum harmonisation on the conditions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for the application of asylum that will be applied in each European country.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In order to establish those criteria, we will push for an enhancement of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mandate of EASO (the Malta Asylum Office) to develop a standardised
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
asylum process on the basis of data that is centrally available. We will then
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
push for an amendment of Regulation 604/2013, the so-called Dublin
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regulation. This amendment will replace the first country of arrival as the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
country in which an asylum application has to take place. Instead, a principle
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
of preference will be followed: asylum-seekers will be granted the right of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
passage to apply for asylum in those countries in which they prefer to stay.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
After the initial commencement of the asylum procedure in the country of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
preference, asylum-seekers will enter a resettlement system to ensure that
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
European countries manage the refugee flow together. The conditions for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resettlement will be based on objective factors such as population density,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
wealth, age, and growth. The amended system will allow European countries
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to contribute with accommodation capacity or funding. Countries who do
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
not abide by it will be sanctioned in the form of withdrawal of benefits,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
putting a price on the absence of solidarity.  
In addition, we will introduce a proposal for the reformation of the Common
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European Asylum System to include the possibility of permanent residence
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for refugees after a certain period if they are still at risk (five to seven
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
years), on the condition that certain criteria are met, such as having a clean
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
track record, acquisition of language skills, and knowledge of key elements
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the country. 
Funding? ​The Asylum Migration and Integration Fund will be relied upon.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The enhancement of the mandate of EASO will be financed according to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EASO Financial Regulation. 
 
Make the asylum system fair, effective and quick​, by issuing EU
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
guidelines that ensure shorter asylum procedures and provide for social,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
legal and psychological support. 
Why​? Reformation of the Dublin System and improving the asylum-seeking
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
procedure have to go hand in hand. Leaving asylum-seekers in state of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"pending" for any extended period while deciding on their legal status is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
detrimental on an individual level, and also prevents any efforts of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
meaningful integration. Both the asylum process and opportunities for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
asylum-seekers to try and integrate need to be improved if we want to turn
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
perceived risks into actual chances. 
How​? We will introduce a proposal for the amendment of the Asylum
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Procedures Directive to include minimum harmonised rules on the legal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
status of refugees across European countries. This will leave discretion to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European countries with respect to accepting or rejecting asylum-seekers.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
But, it will include a common standard for the reception of applications and
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their
treatment
during
the
asylum procedure, guided by standards
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
developed by international expert organisations such as UNHCR. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
exceptions to minimum standards will be reviewed and phased out where
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
possible. The amendment will focus specifically on ensuring better decisions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on asylum application at first instance, to make the procedure quicker and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
effective, because there will be less need to resort to appeals. Moreover,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the amendment will ensure that the presumption of safe third countries can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
be rebutted. Asylum-seekers should be provided the opportunity to argue
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on an individual basis whether a third country is safe in their particular
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
situation. 
We will also introduce a proposal for the amendment of the Reception
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conditions Directive to leave less discretion on the interpretation of what
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
an adequate standard of living entails. The proposal will include, in addition
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to standards related to housing and access to social services, the right to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
receive psychological support if so needed.  
We will also propose the inclusion of a complaint system in case these
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
common procedural requirements are not complied by in European
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
countries. Such a complaint system should be available outside of domestic
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
administrative procedures to better safeguard the legal protection of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
asylum-seekers.  
Funding? The Asylum Migration and Integration Fund will be used to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitate the establishment of a European wide complaint system. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regulatory changes will not impact the EU budget. 
 
Ensure
successful
integration
and
a
benefit
for
the
economy.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
asylum-seekers must be able to enter the job market from day one, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their skills must be more easily recognised. In addition, language
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
training must be offered to all asylum-seekers. 
Why? Integration starts with enabling. We should support asylum-seekers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
who are motivated to learn and seeking to contribute. By helping to meet
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
basic needs and assisting on the path to employment, we are fulfilling our
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
part of allowing actual integration. 
How? We will introduce a proposal to adapt Regulation 2013/32 on the
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
granting and withdrawing of international protection of asylum-seekers to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ensure that the right to work is included from day one. In addition, this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proposal will include procedures on the recognition of skills to allow
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
asylum-seekers to continue the vocation they fulfilled in their country of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
origin, for as far as this is possible.  
Next to this, we will lobby for the inclusion of a policy of "enable and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
expect" in the new Asylum Procedure Regulation. This policy will ensure that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the necessary conditions are in place to make effective use of the right to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
work, such as learning the language of the country of destination. It will also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
be specified that the right to work includes essential obligations such as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
respecting the rule of law.  
Funding? ​Not applicable, this proposal bears no cost for the EU budget.  
46 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
Uphold
asylum
seekers’
and
refugees’
rights​,
by
monitoring
and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sanctioning Member States who breach these rights, e.g., by detaining
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
asylum seekers when unnecessary and under inhumane conditions 
Why? Detainment other than for administrative purposes is at odds with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
international standards. Too often detainment is used as an instrument to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
control and demotivate migration.
We believe all nations of the European
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18
Union are able to offer safe and humane conditions during and after the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
process of registering asylum seekers. This is especially needed when it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
comes to the most vulnerable groups of asylum seekers, including
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unaccompanied minors. 
 
How? We will introduce a proposal to amend the Reception Conditions
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Directive to leave less discretion to individual countries in deciding upon the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conditions and procedural safeguards of detention. Less discretion will lead
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to the phasing out of pre-existing practices, especially in those cases where
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
detention is used to demotivate and control migrants. It will also address
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the practice of automatic alternatives to detention, such as house arrest,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
utilized to control migration. 
In addition, we will work towards more comprehensive data collection with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
respect to the detainment practices of individual states by proposing to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
introduce an amendment to the Migration Statistics Regulation. More
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
specific reporting requirements will simplify monitoring the compliance with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
legislative obligations. 
In line with improved monitoring, we will propose to introduce the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
possibility to receive benefits for those individual states that show good
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
faith in complying with the standards for the reception of asylum seekers. 
Funding? ​The benefits will be funded by the Asylum Migration and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Integration Fund. 
 
Protect those in need​, by classifying famine and climate migrants as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
refugees
under
European
law
and by strengthening the use of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
humanitarian corridors. 
Why? In unstable times, we need to increase European efforts beyond
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
borders. This includes working towards ending conflicts and helping to build
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
up local infrastructures that prevent people from having to become a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
refugee in the first place. Currently, this concerns a small group of people,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
18 European Council on Refugees and Exiles (ECRE), The detention of asylum seekers in Europe, available at: 
https://www.ecre.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/AIDA-Brief_Detention-1.pdf​.  
47 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
and most already qualify as refugees.
However, Volt believes that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19
European countries are under an obligation to protect and extend support
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to the ones most affected and least responsible for climate change. 
How? As a long-term objective, we will propose an amendment of the 1951
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Refugee Convention for the definition of refugee to also include famine and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
climate migrants. European countries cannot do this alone, but we believe
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that a joint lobby will send a strong message and positively contribute to
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
realising this goal.  
In the short-term, while lobbying for amending the legal definition of a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
refugee, we support the (re-)introduction of a humanitarian visa for all
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
European countries. In the proposal for the legislative text, we will include
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
famine and climate migrants as included as a collective group in need of
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
protection, in effect guaranteeing this group the same rights as refugees.  
The introduction of a humanitarian visa will initially be done by means of a
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
visa
waiver
for
citizens
of
top
refugee
producing
countries.
Visa
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
requirements for nationals from these States will be suspended through an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
adaptation of the visa lists in Regulation 539/2001. In the long-term, we will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
propose a legal instrument in the form of a Regulation in which issuing
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
criteria and procedures are included.  
We will propose to rely on the systematic establishment of humanitarian
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
corridors throughout European countries so that asylum-seekers will not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have to resort to smuggling and human trafficking to enter Europe.  
Funding? The systematic establishment of humanitarian corridors would be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
part of the Common European Asylum System for which the Asylum
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Migration and Integration Fund can be relied upon.  
Labour 
migration 
Protect both domestic and foreign workers against the negative effects of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
economic migration, by applying minimum harmonisation among all
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European countries ensuring that access to basic social, legal and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
medical services is guaranteed 
Why? A Europe that grants the right of free movement and labour must
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have at least a minimum set of rules that regulate movement. This means
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ensuring that basic services are available to everyone, while also limiting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
national initiatives to circumvent regulations for short term, local benefits. 
How? ​We will introduce policies that focus on relocation, building on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
efforts of the 2015 Emergency Relocation System. We will advocate the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
introduction of a directive that specifies the rights of all categories of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 Horn of Africa, Yemen, Nigeria. See UNCHR, Death risk from starvation in Horn of Africa, Yemen, Nigeria 
growing, displacement already rising, available at 
https://www.unhcr.org/news/briefing/2017/4/58ec9d464/unhcr-says-death-risk-starvation-horn-africa-yemen-nige
ria-growing-displacement.html​.  
48 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
economic migrants, similar to the amended Directive 2014/36 in which the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rights of seasonal workers are clarified. In addition, we will work towards
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
increased diversity among migrants by advocating to end the practice
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prevalent in European countries to grant residency to affluent foreigners
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
buying local properties or investing into local business. 
Funding?​ Not applicable, this proposal bears no cost for the EU budget. 
 
Increase legal pathways into Europe, by offering a specific visa to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
temporary foreign workers. 
Why? Both EU and non-EU citizens still face obstacles today when trying to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
find employment in national job markets as well as integrating into
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
societies. We need to avoid wasting higher education by prohibiting market
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
entry and provide a long term perspective to labour migrants who integrate
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and contribute to local societies, while also not forgetting those who are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
not yet able to do so. 
How? We will push for a reform of “Your Europe” to include labour
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
migration and integration for EU and non-EU citizens wanting to live and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
work in another EU country. In addition, once in Parliament, we will revisit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the Single Permit Directive and the Long-Term Resident Directive to ensure
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that the groups of migrants that qualify for application under these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
procedures are sufficiently diverse. To ensure that minors are awarded
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
adequate protection, we will support the establishment of a European
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
network on guardianship which includes unaccompanied minors that fall
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
within the category of irregular economic migrants.  
Funding?​ Not applicable, this proposal bears no cost for the EU budget.  
 
Turn Europe into a talent and innovation hub​, by making it simpler and
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more attractive to obtain an expert visa, ​especially after acquiring a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
university degree in an EU Member State. 
Why? Building sustainable future industries and societies requires the best
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and brightest. We need to emphasise the values Europe stands for and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
market them univocally abroad, while setting in place systems that facilitate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
high-skilled migration and integration at home. 
How? ​We will introduce a proposal to amend the Blue Card Directive and the
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Single Permit Directive to simplify the BlueCard renewal procedure for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
highly-skilled workers and their family members. Through this amendment,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
we will remove parallel applications and other administrative burdens, so
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
making relocation in the EU easier. This will allow BlueCard holders and their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
family members to move around within the Schengen Area and take up
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
employment elsewhere.  
49 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
We will amend the Blue Card Directive to include guidelines with respect to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
salary thresholds, subsequent family migration, visa validity, and social
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
insurances in case of unemployment or disability based on best practices for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
high-skilled migration within Europe. 
In addition, we will lobby for one coherent European strategy of "attracting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the best talent" and actively market it in “target countries” through EU
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delegations and Member State embassies.  
Funding? ​Not applicable, this proposal bears no cost for the EU budget. 
 
Ensure that countries of origin and European countries benefit from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
temporary economic migration, ​by aligning the interests of both and by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
involving all relevant stakeholders (e.g. employers and trade unions) in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the policy making process.  
Why? ​Free movement of labour within the EU has been a key element to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
fostering employability and integration. It is beneficial if driven by demand
 
 
 
     
   
 
 
 
(available jobs) but has shortcomings on the supply side (available
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
candidates) when not enough qualified staff can be found or new workers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
enter the system. Both can be addressed by policies. 
How? ​Once in Parliament, we will draft a proposal for a new legislative
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
instrument in the form of a location-specific temporary residence and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
working permit available to non-EU migrants falling within a specific
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
category of labour migrants, such as health workers or builders, of which
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
there exists a shortage on the European labour market. The eligibility
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
criteria for such a residence and working permit will be derived from an
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
exchange of best practices at the national level of European countries and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from bringing together relevant stakeholders such as employers and labour
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unions, specific to European regions. The relevant stakeholders will be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
brought together in accordance with the 2015 Consultation Guidelines.  
Funding?​ ​Not applicable, this proposal bears no cost for the EU budget.  
 
 
50 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
3. Build a just and sustainable society 
Make Europe Green: Sustainability, Climate and 
Environment 
 
Europe must be at the forefront of a green economic transformation to reap its benefits and
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
lead the fight against climate change. To ensure that the increase of global temperature will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
not surpass 1,5°C the shift towards sustainability needs to be much faster and bolder than it is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
today. While the EU cannot address global challenges alone, it can and should lead the way in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
trying to reduce the immediate and future effects of climate change and set an example for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
other regions. Only then will it be able to position itself in the green industries of the future. 
 
Proposals: 
Minimise 
climate 
footprint 
Grow the green economy​, by introducing an EU-wide carbon tax and other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
forms of carbon pricing along the entire production chain and by ending
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
subsidies on fossil-based fuel. The funds gained will be used for relevant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
climate mitigation and adaptation projects and to create new jobs. 
Why? With climate reports stressing that we are not doing enough to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prevent unsustainable levels of global warming, EU policies need to move
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from providing indirect incentives to reduce CO2, to actually putting a price
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
on CO2. Europe has the resources and technology to take the lead in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
preventing climate change by curbing CO2 production without hindering
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
international competitiveness. 
How? We will introduce a proposal to amend the Energy Taxation Directive
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to introduce a carbon tax on those sectors not yet covered by the Emissions
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Trading System, specifically fossil fuels in transportation and heating. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proposal will require European countries to introduce a minimum rate for
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
carbon tax on fossil fuels. In addition, we will propose to adapt the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Emissions Trading Directive and the Auctioning Regulation to include a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
minimum allowance price in the EU Emissions Trading Scheme (50€ in 2025)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to create long-term price stability for developing and investing in clean
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technology. Other steps that will be taken include the introduction of a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
proposal to reduce free emission allowances and review eligibility criteria as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
included in the "carbon leakage list" by amending the Emissions Trading
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Directive. Furthermore, we will introduce a proposal to amend the Energy
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
Taxation Directive to no longer exempt fossil fuels, and so work towards
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
phasing out subsidies.  
Funding?​ Not applicable, this proposal bears no cost for the EU budget. 
51 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
 
Use energy in a smarter way, ​by introducing smart electricity grids, by
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
setting
more
ambitious
energy-saving
targets,
and
by
creating
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
incentives for green and low-energy public transportation. 
Why​? With climate change implicitly demanding ambitious energy targets,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
steps need to be undertaken to establish a system capable of handling
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
energy
fluctuation
and
decentralised generation. In the same vein,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transportation in general needs to be moving towards low polluting,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
efficient infrastructures capable of meeting demand while leaving the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
smallest energy footprint possible. 
How? We will introduce a proposal to fulfill the commitments of the Paris
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Agreement by including more ambitious climate and clean energy targets
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
going beyond the 40% emissions reduction laid out in the European-wide
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nationally Determined Contribution. Volt will develop a proposal to include
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
more
ambitious
targets in the Energy Efficiency Directive and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Renewable Energy Directive; we work towards a 55% emission reduction
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
target for the revised NDC, 40% more energy efficiency, 45% renewables by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2030. The proposal will aim at decreasing the emissions of the transport
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sector by moving cross-country transnational freight off the roads except
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for the last mile, reducing traffic congestion and pollution. In addition, we
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will refocus transportation subsidies from non self-sufficient installations
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
such as airports to growing low emission infrastructures. We will further the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sharing of alternative energies generated in European countries by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
introducing a proposal for a new legislative instrument in which minimum
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
harmonised standards are included to facilitate a harmonised EU network of
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
electric LNG/hydrogen fuel stations. 
Funding? To realise the necessary cooperation among European countries
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for the purpose of establishing a harmonised network for the distribution of
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
energy, we will rely on the European Regional Development Fund. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cohesion and the Structural Funds will be used to re-focus transportation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
subsidies.  
52 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
Circular 
Economy 
Truly kick-start the circular economy​, by stimulating the provision of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
goods and services that are renewable and sustainable. This will be done
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by harmonising tax incentives, speeding up the regulatory processes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and
providing funds to rethink the design and digitalisation of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
organisations, goods and services. 
Why? Over the last decades, we have become used to consuming products
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with no regard to the end of their life cycle. As man-made trash is becoming
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
increasingly visible wherever we go and whatever we eat, Volt believes it is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
time to move towards a more circular economy and truly speak of products
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
life "cycles".  
How? Much has been done already to remove regulatory barriers in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European countries. However, a fully circular economy is hampered because
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
the regulatory system has not been adjusted accordingly. We will introduce
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a proposal for new legislation that focuses on the conditions for such a new
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
regulatory system. A new system will operate on the basis of two
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conditions: 1) That it internalises environmental costs and the value of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
recuperation of strategic materials, 2) That it stimulates the design for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
circularity through extended producer responsibility. To ensure that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proposal will truly address current barriers for businesses to comply with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the circular economy, a committee will be established to research how the
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
new regulatory system should be designed. 
In addition, we will introduce a proposal to amend Directive 94/62 on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
packaging waste to include minimum harmonisation across European
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
countries to standardise packaging of non-consumer products, beyond
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shipping containers and euro-palettes, and introduce reusable packaging on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the last mile. 
Funding? ​We will fund research into the best ways to adjust the regulatory
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system relying on the LIFE programme.  
 
Stop plastic-based pollution and reduce waste in general​, by taxing the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
use of plastic, single-use products and polluted recyclables, and by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
banning the export of waste into non-EU countries. 
Why? As the world is literally drowning in trash, more ambitious efforts
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
should be undertaken to significantly reduce packaging or preserve and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
recycle a larger share of it. Contamination of recyclables is as much of a
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
problem as the inability to properly sort and reuse mixed material
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
packaging, as non-EU countries are no longer willing to import EU trash. Volt
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
believes it is time to act. 
How? ​We will ensure that plastic waste is decreased to a minimum so that
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
the recycling target of 55% is reached by 2030, as outlined in the EU Plastic
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
53 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
Strategy 2018 and the Packaging and Packaging Waste Directive, by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
focussing on the role of businesses in recycling plastic. We will introduce a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
proposal to strengthen Extended Producer Responsibility legislation and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitate the sharing of best practices to support efforts to make recycling
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
profitable. On top of that, we will ensure that European countries work
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
together to set an example with respect to the reduction of waste beyond
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the border. A programme similar to Horizon 2020 will be established with
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the aim to support projects such as cleaning up the Great Pacific Garbage
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Patch. 
Funding? ​The LIFE programme will be used to gather best practices with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
respect to making recycling become profitable for businesses.  
 
Move towards sustainable consumption and government spending, ​by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
introducing a Circular Economy Label, by adopting a green public
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
procurement standard and by supporting resource sharing and product
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
longevity. 
Why? Current product regulations set high standards for quality, but more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
emphasis should be put on the importance of the longevity of a product.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
From cars and cellphones to clothes, we have become accustomed to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
replacing products in short intervals, often throwing still perfectly usable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
items away. 
How? We will introduce a “CCE” label that adds "circularity" to safety, health
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and environmental protection (the existing “CE” label), in a similar fashion to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
the introduction of the EU eco-label. In addition, we will push for a system
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
that rewards longevity and right-to-repair over just a two year guarantee by
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
introducing minimum standards applicable in all countries in the EU,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
requiring manufacturers to make products more easily repairable.  
Funding? ​Not applicable, this proposal bears no cost for the EU budget.  
54 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
Sustainable 
Agriculture 
Support sustainable agriculture, ​by refocusing the Common Agricultural
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Policy away from larger producers and towards producers that use
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ecological approaches. 
Why? It is well established that livestock agriculture is highly resource
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
intensive, and leads to deforestation and erosion in many parts of the world.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
While maintaining middle and large producers may increase competition
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20
and keep prices down, it increases the risk of developing monocultures
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which are not sustainable both from an economic as well as from an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
environmental perspective. To maintain sustainable agriculture, industrial
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technology needs to be relied on only to increase resource efficiency and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
when this has no adverse environmental impacts.  
How​? We will support the sustainability reform of the Common Agricultural
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Policy (CAP). Firstly, by introducing a proposal to include in the CAP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
increased payouts as part of ‘green’ direct payment to farms of all sizes to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
move from monoculture to rotating and diverse cultures. Secondly, by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
providing benefits to stimulate sharing and co-investing in machinery,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
collaborating on data, and developing solutions for use of manure, water,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and food waste. 
Funding? The European Agricultural Guarantee Fund will be relied upon, as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
well as the European Agricultural Fund for Regional Development.  
 
Increase product quality and biodiversity, by supporting farms that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
manage land in accordance with local ecosystems, by focusing on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
connecting natural habitats, and by banning the use of pesticides and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
neonicotinoids. 
Why? ​The focus on monocultures and resulting susceptibility of crops and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
livestock to diseases requires heavy use of pesticides and antibiotics, which,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in turn, affects insect populations and can render antibiotics useless for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
treating human diseases. This is too heavy a price tag to put on our eco- and
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
health systems. 
How? Once in the European Parliament, we will push for a resolution
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
limiting the use of pesticides that have not been approved by organic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
farming associations to promote local biodiversity and varieties, and to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reduce susceptibility to fungi/diseases. Additionally, ​by further developing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the link between the reception of income support and the protection of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
animal welfare, we will push for stricter standards on livestock farming with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
species-appropriate herd sizes, adequate space, and the integration of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
playthings as part of a general animal welfare legislation.  
20 Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) available at ​http://www.fao.org/docrep/010/a0701e/a0701e00.HTM  
55 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
Funding? ​The European Agricultural Guarantee Fund will be relied upon, as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
well as the European Agricultural Fund for Regional Development.  
 
 
56 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
3. Build a just and sustainable society 
by pushing for fairness and equality 
 
People are still subject to discrimination and social exclusion on multiple grounds, including
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
gender, sexuality, race, ethnic origin, or beliefs. The EU needs to adopt a comprehensive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
approach, seeking to end all forms of discrimination. Everyone has to be guaranteed equal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rights and opportunities, and human rights need to be respected, applied, and upheld. Let’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
make Europe equal by 2025! 
 
Proposals​:  
Equality & 
Anti-discri-
mination 
 
 
Break the glass ceiling​, by legally enforcing representation of women on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
publicly-listed corporate boards by 2025 and requiring businesses to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
report on gender pay and gender balance. 
Why? ​With the gender pay gap in the EU at 16.2% , and average female
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21
representation on corporate boards at 23%,
we have a long long way to go
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
22
before achieving gender equality in the workplace. Mandatory quotas and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
greater transparency will help towards breaking the glass ceiling, i.e. the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
barriers that stand in the way of women achieving their full potential.  
How? We will seek to withdraw the current Women on Boards Directive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23
and work towards replacing it with a strengthened proposal to push for an
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
increased representation of women on corporate boards, through means of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a temporary gender quota, to be implemented progressively ​−companies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
will have to reach 30% representation of women by 2020 and 40% by 2025.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Such a timeframe will provide companies sufficient time to adjust their
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
succession planning and hire new female directors. If they don’t comply,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
companies will face delisting from the market and fines. The new directive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will also call for mandatory reporting on gender balance and gender pay
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
gaps in both public and private medium- and big-sized companies. In order to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prevent the directive from being blocked again, we will put pressure on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Member States to take public positions. We will also seek to work towards
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
adapting a directive aimed at guaranteeing workers' participation and voting
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on the board of directors of publicly-listed companies (by refreshing the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 EU publications, Report on equality between women and men in the EU 2018, available at 
https://publications.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/950dce57-6222-11e8-ab9c-01aa75ed71a1 
22 The European Commission, Justice and fundamental Rights, available at 
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/gender%C2%ADequality/files/gender_balance_decision_making/1607_factsheet_final
_%20wob_data_en.pdf  
23 Proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council available at 
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A52012PC0614  
57 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
abortive Fifth Company Law Directive), which will also impose a gender
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
clause, whereby men and women have to be equally represented.  
Funding​? Not applicable: this proposal bears no cost for the EU budget. 
 
Ensure that women’s rights are upheld​, by legalising and providing access
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to free abortion until the end of the first trimester, and providing free
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
contraception everywhere across Europe. 
Why? Access to reproductive health care services, goods, and facilities is still
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
restricted for women in some European states, where tight abortion and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
contraception regulations result in an inability for women to take full
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
control over their own bodies.
There are five remaining EU countries in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24
which abortion is either banned or restricted, while access to contraception
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
greatly varies across Member States.  
How? We will propose a recommendation pushing all Member States to set
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a common abortion practice and to change national legislations so that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
abortion is legal on request up to at least the twelfth week of pregnancy,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and longer in cases when the fetus is not viable or the continued pregnancy
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
would endanger the mother. Each healthcare provider will have to identify
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and communicate to the Ministry of each Member State the location and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
total number of doctors that are able to perform abortion −each hospital
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
and clinic will have to have at least one doctor that can perform abortion.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This information will have to be publicly accessible. In addition, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
recommendation will call for all forms of contraception to be accessible and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
available for free.  
Funding?​ Not applicable: this proposal bears no cost for the EU budget. 
 
Guarantee equal rights to all, ​by ensuring access to the same procedures,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rights and unions to every individual in society, including marriage for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
all.  
Why? ​There are several instances throughout the EU where certain
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
members of society are put in disadvantaged positions. A striking example is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
that same-sex marriage and joint adoption is legal in only 15
and 15
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25
26
Member States respectively. Moreover, ethnic and religious minorities often
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 For example, in Poland, abortion is only lawful to safeguard the life or health of a woman, in situations of severe 
fetal anomaly, or where the pregnancy results from rape or another criminal act such as incest; and even in those 
situations in which abortion is legal, multiple barriers combine to limit women’s access in practice. See Human 
Rights Watch, Polish Parliament Must Protect Women’s Health and Rights, available at 
https://www.hrw.org/news/2018/03/22/polish​parliament​must​protect​womens​health​and​rights  
25 ​Marriage, Europa, available at ​https://europa.eu/youreurope/citizens/family/couple/marriage/index_en.htm  
26 The European Region of the International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex Association, available at 
https://rainbow-europe.org/#0/8682/0  
58 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
fall victim to marginalisation, and have difficulties in effectively enjoying
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their
civil
rights
and
freedoms.
Similarly,
people
with
disabilities,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27
representing 17.6% of Europeans, experience restrictions preventing them
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from fully participating in society.  
How? We will make sure that a recommendation for Member States to
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
recognise same-sex marriage as a legal form of civil union and that allows for
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
every couple to have the same opportunities to adopt a child regardless of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
their sexual orientation is passed in the European Parliament. We will also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
push for the adoption of a Directive aimed at guaranteeing the effective
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
implementation
of
the
non-discrimination Directives 2000/43/EC and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2000/78/EC. Through the Enforcement Directive, we will ask Member States
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to require the presence of a non-discrimination officer, with monitoring and
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
disciplinary authority, in sensitive contexts such as schools, workplace,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tribunals, hospitals, sports, and recreational activities. In addition, we will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
raise and support a directive (based on the principles of Article 153.1 lett. a
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
and h) that will aim to facilitate people with disabilities to have equal access
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to the labour market. Such a Directive will aim to remove structural barriers
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and minimise the impacts of an impairment on an individual's capacity to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participate in the workplace. The directive will complement the current
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European Disability Strategy. 
Funding?​ Not applicable: this proposal bears no cost for the EU budget.  
Public 
Sector 
End police violence and discriminatory treatment of minorities, ​by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
providing police training and revising laws, tackling biased persecution
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and ensuring that the judiciary does not discriminate against minorities. 
Why? Despite existing anti-discriminatory laws, minorities across Europe are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
frequently singled out by the police for checks and questioning without
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
adequate justification other than their ethnicity, skin colour or religion.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28
They are also more likely to face arrest, charging, prosecution and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
imprisonment. Similarly, along with other vulnerable groups −including
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
women and LGBTIQ+ people −, these individuals are often discriminated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
against in courts owing to bias practices within the justice system. 
How? We will lobby for the EU Agency for Law Enforcement Training to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
develop clear and common guidance and limit officers’ discretionary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
authority. We will also strengthen the fundamental principle of access to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
justice, already recognised by the EU (Article 47 CFREU; Article 4.3 TEU;
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Article 19 TEU), by launching an assessment aimed at testing and improving
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the implementation of those EU measures oriented at ensuring a fair and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
27 Equinet Wokring Group on Equality Law, Fighting discrimination on the ground of race and ethnic origin, 
available at ​http://www.equineteurope.org/IMG/pdf/equinet_discussion_paper_final_-_web-2.pdf  
28 Human Rights Watch, France: the Human Rights Implications of the Presidential Campaign, available at 
https://www.hrw.org/news/2017/03/29/france​human​rights​implications​presidential​campaign  
59 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
public hearing before a tribunal, such as Directive 2012/13/EC; Directive
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
2010/64/EU; and Directive 2013/48/EC. In addition, we will promote an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
inter-institutional declaration which specifies that the EU recognises all the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rights and freedoms defined by the European Convention of Human Rights
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as general principles of EU law, including but not limited to, the prohibition
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of torture, the right to a fair trial, and the right to an effective remedy. 
Funding?​ Not applicable: this proposal bears no cost for the EU budget. 
 
Aim for full equality and diversity for underrepresented groups in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
public sector in Member States and in EU institutions, by putting in place
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
preferential treatment, reporting on diversity and accommodating
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
special needs. 
Why? Key public positions, both at national and European levels, are run by a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
homogenous group of individuals that do not adequately portray the society
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
they are meant to represent.  
How? While in the European Parliament, we will craft a directive requiring
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
national,
regional
and
local
public
administrations
to
give
special
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consideration, throughout the hiring process, to individuals from an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
underrepresented minority in case of final candidates being equally
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
qualified. The directive will also call for mandatory reporting on overall
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
diversity and for the establishment of an anti-discrimination officer.  
Funding?​ Not applicable: this proposal bears no cost for the EU budget. 
 
Ensure equal gender representation in EU politics and encourage female
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participation, ​by having gender-alternate lists of candidates and by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
other means, such as mandatory reporting on gender representation. 
Why? In the EU, up to 70% of national parliamentarians are men, and women
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
form only 36%
of the European Parliament, despite studies showing that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29
more women in politics results in stronger democracies. This discrepancy
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
needs to change, and we have to ensure that gender representation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
increases within decision-making positions. 
How? While in the European Parliament, we will work to pass a directive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
requiring all EU bodies to report on gender balance and to set concrete
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
plans to increase gender representation within. In addition, we will push
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
forward a recommendation calling for political parties to achieve parity on
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
electoral lists. The recommendation will also call on all political parties to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
submit altering lists of male and female candidates for European election.  
29 European Parliament, Women in the European Parliament, available at 
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/publications/2018/0001/P8_PUB%282018%290001_EN.pdf  
60 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
Funding?​ Not applicable: this proposal bears no cost for the EU budget. 
Inclusion 
Make housing affordable, by integrating social and shared housing into
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the EU cohesion policy. Use available funds for social housing to improve
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the situation of low income groups, including marginalised groups, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
urge Member States to subsidise shared social living. 
Why? ​Social housing production has decreased across most European states
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the past years. Across the EU, approximately 1 out of 20 people suffers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
from severe housing deprivation, and housing is currently the highest
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expenditure for Europeans, with overburden rate remaining high.
In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30
addition, in most Member States, house prices are growing faster than
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
income, mainly affecting the poor and marginalised groups, including
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
children.  
How? We will support the European Commission in modernising its Cohesion
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Policy and ensure that the new framework allocates funds to sustainable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
social and shared housing across the EU. We will do this by lobbying on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
principles of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU and of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European Pillar of Social Rights, that access to affordable housing and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shelter constitutes a core element of the ‘social inclusion’ objective. We will
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
also call on the European Commission to integrate social housing in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
allocation of relevant funds −such as the European Social Fund Plus,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European
Fund
for
Strategic
Investments
and
European
Regional
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Development Fund −to support Member States and to increase the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transparency and accessibility to those funds. Finally, while in the European
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Parliament, we will push for a Commission recommendation calling on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Member States to invest in social housing and other forms of shared-living,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as
an
essential
instrument
to
alleviating
poverty
and
supporting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
marginalised groups. We will also use the cycles of policy coordination,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
namely the European Semester and the Open Method of Coordination, to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
encourage Member States to adopt initiatives directed at sustainable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
housing.  
Funding? ​Various funds will be used, including the European Social Fund
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Plus, European Fund for Strategic Investments and European Regional
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Development Fund.  
 
Alleviate child poverty​, by implementing a minimum standard for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
universal child benefits across the EU. 
30 Eurostat, Housing Statistics, available at 
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Housing_statistics  
61 


 
All rights reserved by Volt Europa A.S.B.L. 
 
Why? ​Up to 25 million children in the EU live in low income households and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are at risk of poverty and social exclusion.
Child poverty can have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31
long-term consequences, affecting educational attainments, access to equal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
opportunities, and participation in economic and social life.  
How? We will work towards ensuring that adequate attention and financial
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resources are dedicated to implementing minimum standards for universal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
child benefits in order to ensure the well-being of children until they reach
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
adulthood, and preserve their human dignity. We will initiate a close
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cooperation and dialogue with EU institutions, such as the Council and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Commission, to make sure that the national operational programmes of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European Social Fund and the European Regional Development Fund
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
allocate adequate resources to finance this proposal. Furthermore, we will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
monitor the definition of the national operational programmes through the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tools available to the European Parliament.  
Funding? The Regional Development Fund and the European Social Fund
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Plus will be used.  
 
 
31 European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights, Combating Child Poverty: an issue of fundamental rights, 
available at ​http://fra.europa.eu/en/publication/2018/child-poverty  
62 


