The Economic Vision of Volt Europa
Volt Europa was born out of a vision for a united Europe that ensures the well-being
of all Europeans and future generations. We, at Volt, strongly believe that the path
forward requires a thriving economy that drives Europe’s prosperity in a sustainable
way.
As a progressive movement, we challenge old narratives posing tradeoffs between
economic growth and inequality or sustainability. Instead, we promote a vision where
smart
policies
protect,
provide
opportunities,
and
drive
economic
progress
simultaneously.
As a pragmatic movement, we plan to guide economic policies on solid scientific
studies and best practices whenever possible, and to ensure all new policies are
studied and their metrics for success defined ahead of time.
We stand for solidarity and equality, so that every European is given the opportunity
to thrive, where a healthy economy is built on a healthy and educated workforce, and
where a robust safety net funded by fair taxation leads to more harmonious and
equitable outcomes.
We stand for a dynamic economy based on innovation and entrepreneurship. Our goal
is sustainable economic prosperity, which can only be achieved when economic
growth is decoupled from social and environmental harm. We aim to reduce
inequalities
and
respect
planetary
boundaries,
ensuring
resilience
and
intergenerational fairness.
One of the main economic principles of Volt is that there should be as much market as
possible and as much state as necessary. Economic freedom is essential to foster
innovation and investment. At the same time, it is up to the state to correct market
failures, determine broad economic strategy and to ensure an equitable society.
For that, we must gather forces in a pan-European economy. From fiscal policy, to the
banking union, to the labour market, we stand to greatly benefit from an ever closer
union. By tearing down the barriers between our national economies, we will unleash
Europe’s full potential.
This vision will be achieved by an economic model that is based on the following four
pillars: an innovative and prosperous economy, a fair and equitable society, a resilient
and sustainable foundation, and a truly European ambition.


1. An innovative and prosperous economy
We strive for a dynamic economy in all EU member states and regions as the backbone
of our economic model. Hence, our policies are focused on ensuring that local
economies create an environment that promotes high-productivity work. In order to
achieve this, we emphasise the need to create a corruption-free, smart, and digital
state that fosters new technologies and new types of work undertaken by a skilled
workforce.
Investing in innovation
Europe must be at the forefront of technological innovation, both to boost its
economic growth as well as to ensure that new technologies are in line with European
values. While much great research is done in Europe, many important developments
driving
the
digital
revolution,
such
as
Big
Data,
Artificial
Intelligence, and
cybersecurity have not gotten enough attention. Europe needs to catch up on these
missed opportunities and invest heavily in both fundamental and applied research.
Volt wants to continue joint investment programs, such as Horizon Europe, to
encourage innovative research. At the same time, Volt strongly supports a
transparent investment-promoting tax system that supports the entrepreneurship of
innovative small and medium-sized enterprises and the creation of new jobs. Europe
should reinforce existing, and invest in new, specialised technological hubs across the
continent.
Single Market
We envision a Europe where barriers are dismantled, enabling companies to grow and
effectively compete with businesses born in other major markets. By simplifying and
harmonising regulations, providing vital support, and fostering cross-border trade, we
are
determined
to
empower
our
entrepreneurs
and
innovators
to
reach
unprecedented heights of success.
Market Regulation
It is also crucial to ensure corporate regulation fosters competitive markets and does
not allow for some companies to acquire a dominant market position which can be
abused to hurt workers and consumers. Regulators must keep a watchful eye on
market concentration and collusion. Intellectual property laws should be calibrated to
be generous enough to foster investment, but not to the point of stifling competition.
Digitalisation
Europe needs efficient state apparatuses that assist economic development instead
of slowing it down. This will be achieved through the digitalisation of public services
to make bureaucracy more efficient, and investments to increase public service


attractivity and quality. States must find the best way to integrate new technologies
such as AI in order to create a more efficient and user-friendly public administration.
However, digitalisation should not replace the possibility for human interaction.
Digital solutions should empower citizens, and be developed based on their needs.
Additionally, Europe must ensure the continued investment in infrastructure required
to support increasing digitalisation, including the entire value-chain.
Education
A fair and innovative economy needs skilled workers and a well-educated population.
Volt wants European states to provide free, accessible, and high-quality education for
every
citizen,
including
affordable pre-school childcare. Education should be
accessible to all Europeans, regardless of their background. Concretely, Volt wants to
invest in the quality of public education to reduce the divide with private education.
Due to technological advancements such as digitalisation, automation, and Artificial
Intelligence, the labour market is changing drastically once again. Both workers and
educational systems need to be able to adapt to the ever-changing world of work.
Volt supports a flexible and ambitious education system where students become apt
problem-solvers and familiar with new technologies from early on. Higher education
should function in close collaboration with academia and industry, to quickly respond
to changes in demand for certain skills and talents. At the same time, Volt wants to
encourage education in a broad selection of subjects to embrace and foster the
diverse skills needed for an innovative and creative society. In addition, Volt wants to
improve the proper recognition of competencies and certifications across borders to
allow Europeans to work anywhere in Europe. Finally, since education is a lifelong
journey, Volt supports the promotion of reskilling programs for adults.
Corruption and transparency
In order to harness the gains of a strong, competitive market, European states must
ensure its architecture is transparent and resilient. The first step is the fight against
corruption, which still remains a major impediment throughout our continent.
Corruption results in misallocation of resources and funds, and minimises the
opportunities and motivation of citizens to be productive. In response, we promote a
fair, transparent, and efficient legal system, independent institutions, and effective
law enforcement. For this purpose, it is crucial to harmonise relevant economic
legislation and to foster international cooperation and information-sharing.


2. A fair and equitable society
Over the past decades, Europe has become richer, but this wealth has not been shared
equitably enough among Europeans. Volt wants every one of us to profit from the
prosperity of our economy, regardless of who we are or where we are. We aim to
ensure equal opportunities for all European citizens through fair education,
healthcare, employment policies, and just and progressive taxation.
Fair taxation
Through taxation we all contribute to our society and with a fair taxation system we
all contribute equally within our means. Just taxation should be paramount, so that
those that profit most from our society also contribute most to its upkeep. Volt wants
to implement progressive wealth, inheritance, and gift taxes to ensure that everyone
pays their fair share and wealth inequality is decreased. Volt also considers taxes a
driver for change, meaning that taxes can be used to promote behaviour that leads to
a more equal and sustainable Europe. In the fight for affordable housing and against
homelessness, implementing a Land Value Tax is one example of how taxation can
foster better outcomes, in this case by encouraging more efficient use of our land. In
the corporate sector, we must ensure that all multinational companies with activities
in Europe pay their fair share of profit taxes and lead efforts against fiscal evasion
worldwide.
Collective Bargaining and fair wages
In a fair and just economy, workers get wages that they can live on: a living wage that
is both fair and sustainable, and that can work in a transparent and rule of law-based
environment. In Volt we believe that collective bargaining between organised
employees and employers has proven to give the best outcome when it comes to
creating a sustainable living wage for all.
We recognise that the pillars that hold up a functioning collective bargaining system
do not yet exist in every European state. Therefore we advocate for the creation of a
European minimum wage system, that will ensure that in countries where a system
purely based on collective bargaining is not yet feasible, and where workers do not
have sufficient bargaining power to be heard, a liveable minimum wage will be
ensured. At the same time, it is important that this system works to strengthen the
pillars of collective bargaining so the use of the mechanism grows.


Employment opportunities for all
In line with our commitment to inclusivity, Volt supports affirmative action and
positive discrimination measures. These approaches serve to promote the inclusion of
marginalised individuals in fields and positions that have historically been structurally
inaccessible to them. Volt recognises the need to address systemic barriers and strives
to create a society where everyone has a fair chance to succeed.
To fully utilise our economy’s potential, we need to support those that want to do
paid work, but are now unable to do so. In regions where many young people are
involuntarily
unemployed,
Volt
supports
fiscal
systems
that
incentivise
the
employment of young Europeans. Volt wants to create measures that encourage all
parents to do their fair share of childcare. This will give all parents equal opportunity
to also do paid work, lower financial dependency, and eliminate gender inequality,
including the pay gap. Volt wants to promote policies that allow people with
disabilities to do paid work as much as they are able and willing. Including people with
disabilities in the workforce will improve their financial situation.
Pensions
As Europe’s population ages, more and more resources will be needed for public
pensions. Volt supports the increasing self-sufficiency of pension schemes and
intergenerational justice. Pension policies should ensure the well-being of elderly
citizens, without disproportionally burdening workers and future generations. In
addition, Volt supports policies that support elderly workers to do paid work as long
as they are able and willing.
Welfare
A fair and just economy protects its workers and provides a safety net for those who
need it. We consider it to be a priority to apply evidence-based innovative welfare
tools, such as no-strings attached public benefits, while remaining open to methods
outside said tools that can increase the redistribution role of the welfare state and
the economic independence of citizens. In time, we envision a Europe where everyone
feels economically safe, independently of their employment. This strong safety net
will also foster incentives for Europeans to risk and invest in their business ideas
contributing to a more dynamic economy.


Healthcare
A healthy economy requires healthy people. In Europe, access to healthcare is linked
to national frameworks. Volt wants universal health coverage in Europe for all
Europeans. Volt supports policies that provide access to efficient health services when
and where people need them, including in rural and underfunded areas. This requires
a flexible system that is able to provide care where it is needed.
Volt favours a complete public healthcare system, including mental and preventive
healthcare. Reducing the disease burden from environmental and lifestyle factors by
for example providing cleaner air and water, encouraging a healthy diet and reducing
smoking, will lead to a healthier population overall and reduce the cost of healthcare
for the state. The healthcare system should also be able to quickly make use of new
medical technologies and provide the best possible care. Therefore, Volt promotes
increased investments in our healthcare systems to improve the health of all
Europeans.


3. A sustainable and resilient foundation
Climate change, loss of biodiversity and pollution of soil, water, and air are causing
more and more damage to nature and humans. To ensure that future generations can
also live in a healthy world, we need to act now. To ensure this, Volt promotes a green,
healthy, and sustainable future by reconsidering our main policy goals, boosting
investment in clean energy and transportation, upholding production standards, and
promoting corporate responsibility.
A new growth paradigm
Currently, economic prosperity is often measured based on how much monetary value
is produced; Gross Domestic Product (GDP). However, measuring economic growth
through such a metric has become largely unfit to the social and ecological challenges
of our times. As such, Volt advocates for a new growth paradigm where growth should
no longer be seen solely as the capacity for material abundance. Rather, economic
growth is to be conceived as a vessel for innovation that can liberate economies from
fossil fuel-induced paths, while creating wealth across our society. In order to reshape
the narrative towards what kind of growth we strive for, Volt stands for the adoption
of indicators that transform and go beyond GDP to holistically inform policy-making
towards sustainable prosperity. These indicators would include environmental and
social well-being measures.
An integrated effort at the European level is needed to coordinate what data is
collected and how it can be used to make better, more balanced, and evidence-based
policy. These indicators should be grounded on a social foundation (housing,
sanitation, health, education, leisure, …) met within planetary boundaries (climate
regulation, biodiversity, …). In addition, these indicators should not only cover the
well-being of the current people in Europe, but also how the well-being of future
generations and people elsewhere in the world is affected.
This new growth paradigm is necessary to reconcile economic prosperity with
environmental sustainability and societal well-being.
Green energy
Europe needs to invest to enable the transition to a more sustainable future. For
example, Europe needs to diversify the energy production mix away from fossil fuels
towards clean and renewable alternatives. Volt wants Europe to direct its industrial
policy towards the creation and production of green technologies, such as renewable
energy sources and nuclear power. In addition, Volt wants an integrated European
smart energy grid, connecting the many green energy producers with energy
consumers, and wants to enable the production and selling of energy by individuals.
Lastly, Volt aspires to protect citizens with a low income from extreme energy prices.


Sustainable transportation
Europe should invest in clean and sustainable transport infrastructure, with a focus on
public transport, electric mobility and cycling. Volt wants Europe to invest in
continent-wide infrastructure plans to connect Europeans through an extensive rail
system. These ways of transport will be crucial to connect local, regional, national, and
international communities across our continent, while reducing the polluting effects
of transportation. These investments will also help us improve the health of our
citizens and work towards achieving the WHO targets on air pollution, physical
activity, and green space availability.
Production standards
Volt supports a carbon tax or emissions trading scheme across all sectors of the
economy, including aviation, agriculture and imported goods. Effective carbon pricing
on all greenhouse gases helps reduce carbon emissions required to produce goods
and services. On the other hand, investing in practices with carbon-negative potential,
such as forest protection, agroforestry and the use of bio-sourced construction
materials, can further help with the sustainability goals, while introducing added value
to the economy. By enforcing production standards for sustainability and worker
rights for products produced within Europe and imported goods, Europe can ensure a
level playing field for European industries as well as promote more sustainable
production and fair working conditions across the world.
Corporate responsibility
Companies have a great responsibility to drive the decarbonisation of our economy.
Thus, companies should be required to report on their environmental impact. Europe
should incentivise companies to actively contribute to the protection of the
environment
through,
for
example,
mitigation
measures.
In
addition,
the
environmental impact of companies should be limited by strict environmental
regulations. Volt also supports public-private partnerships to decarbonise.


4. A truly European ambition
To unleash the potential of Europe’s economy and ensure convergence amongst its
member states, we need to go beyond a borderless economy, to a truly pan-European
one. At Volt, we believe that this requires creating a European ﬁnance ministry that
directs ﬁscal and trade policy on the EU level, lifting all barriers within the single
labour market, updating the mandate of the European Central Bank, completing the
banking union, and setting up a framework of European strategic autonomy for basic
goods and services.
European fiscal policy
Volt promotes the creation of a European finance ministry, reporting to the European
parliament. This ministry would have the ability to use spending and tax instruments
to direct fiscal and trade policy for the European Union. This fiscal integration will
support Europe’s ability to respond to strategic challenges and improve the resilience
of the European economy. To ensure the availability of sufficient funds beyond
federal taxes to finance European tasks, Volt wants to institutionalise Eurobonds,
through which Europe can borrow in the capital market.
In the long-run, the European finance ministry would have at its disposal the full range
of federal tax tools. However, in the short-term Europe should focus on pan-European
policies that aim to resolve continental issues first, using such instruments as external
tariffs, a financial transaction tax, emission trading schemes and a carbon tax on
imports. Volt also strongly supports the creation of a European corporate tax. This
corporate tax will ensure that all multinational companies with activities in Europe pay
their fair share of profit taxes and that these companies no longer shift profits across
or outside of Europe to avoid taxation.
Economic security and fiscal responsibility
A European fiscal policy can ensure the stability of the European economy as a whole,
but the economy should also be supported from within by member states. The
Stability and Growth pact agreed among member states aims to ensure the stability of
the European Union from within, but with little success. Volt wants a federal Europe
to
support
member
states
in
dealing
with
their
systemic
problems
while
institutionalising more effective tools to guarantee that they maintain a balanced
budget in structural terms.
Until then, the pact needs to be reformed to better serve its original purpose to
preserve sustainable public debt of the member states. At the same time, the pact
should provide room for countercyclical government spending during economic
downturns and budget savings during economic booms. This spending policy stabilises


economic growth, provides better social security, and reduces excess public debt and
the burden of interest payments for future generations. The European Union should
enforce these rules by withholding EU funds during times of growth without
destabilising member states during an economic downturn.
Free and fair trade
Trade policy must also become truly federalised. Using the weight of the whole
continent in an intelligent way, the EU can both increase the welfare of citizens via
free and fair trade, as well as promote its goals in the rest of the world. By enforcing
production standards, such as for oceanic pollution, sustainability and worker rights,
on its borders, the EU can create a level playing field for its firms and ensure
protection of the global ecosystem and workforce. The EU should also support other
countries with achieving these demands to ensure fair trade, in particular developing
countries that are not able to afford living up to high EU standards.
A European labour market
The European labour market is uneven and while some regions have many people who
are unable to find paid work, other regions are in desperate need of more hands. Volt
wants to remove all barriers to form a single labour market to allow free movement
for Europeans within Europe. Thus, the labour market legislation needs to be
streamlined to make it easier for people to move, work, and live across borders.
Europe should ensure that in an open labour market the wages are fair and
adequately compensate for the work done. To avoid brain drain, skilled workers
should be encouraged to work and live anywhere in Europe, but particularly in areas
that are struggling to maintain their population and attract new talent.
Immigration
An open European labour market should also offer fair opportunities to immigrant
workers from outside of Europe. Doing so would help our economy thrive by
countering the decline in workforce due to the ageing population. This requires a
transparent and welcoming immigration system, with a particular focus on effective
integration policies, which also assure human rights, human dignity and fair
treatment.
A complete European banking union
European firms should be able to draw funds from across Europe independently of
the place where they are established. Volt supports the finalisation of the European
banking union with a common retail deposit insurance and the establishment of a
truly pan-European financial system based on centralised regulation and supervision.
A fair, transparent, and efficient legal system, independent supervisory institutions,
and effective law enforcement are required to effectively combat corruption, money
laundering and tax evasion.


The euro and the European Central Bank
To expand the common market of the European Union and improve the flow of
products and investments across borders, the euro should be introduced in all
member states. Volt urges all countries to try and meet the necessary standards to
adopt the euro as soon as possible. The member states that so far have chosen not to
adopt the euro should also join the single currency. A possible future digital version of
the euro issued by the European Central Bank (ECB), could facilitate electronic
payments with public money. Volt believes that such a digital currency should meet
strict standards in terms of safety and privacy before its use should be considered.
The European Central Bank is responsible for maintaining low inflation for the euro
area and reports to the European Parliament. The mandate of the ECB requires an
update to reduce the negative distributional effects of European monetary policy. A
dual mandate must be enacted that will include high employment in the ECB’s goals.
Volt expects the ECB to support the economic policies of the European Union and
enhance the role of the financial system in mobilising capital for sustainable
investments.
Strategic autonomy
Europe must ensure its strategic autonomy, its ability to act freely in response to
geopolitical changes and tensions. The European economy should be strategically
self-sufficient in basic services and crucial production industries. This will require
European industrial policies to reduce risky dependencies on external economic
relations. In addition, Europe should expand and promote existing and new European
production industries and research facilities to diversify internal supply of essential
products and drive innovation. Already existing European policies that ensure open
strategic autonomy, such as those focused on food production, should be made fairer
and in line with planetary limits. Aside from food production, these policies should
also be applied in other sectors, such as raw materials, and manufacturing in different
important areas such as energy, electronics, and pharmaceutical goods. Additionally,
Europe should invest in reinforcing a joint defence industry to ensure that its defence
capabilities are not hindered by outside factors.


