1
Volt’s Space Policy
A Collaborative and Exploratory Space Strategy for Europe
1


2
Table of Contents
Abstract
4
Executive Summary
5
Introduction
8
Reasoning: Why does Volt need a Space Policy?
8
Collaborative and Exploratory Vision
8
Space Policy Goals and Objectives
12
Relevance for Volt’s 5+1 Challenges
14
Smart State
14
Economic Renaissance
14
Social Equality
14
Global Balance
15
Citizen Empowerment
15
EU Reform
15
Space as the next frontier for science and discovery
15
Space Physics and Astronomy
16
Search for life
17
Policy Recommendations
19
Space Balance: Space Debris and the Sustainable Use of Space
20
Space Debris and Space Traffic Management
20
Eco-design principles and the Sustainable Use of Space
22
Policy Recommendations
23
Revolutionising European Space Transportation Sector
25
Advanced In-space Transportation: Propulsion and Power Sources
26
Policy Recommendations
27
European human spaceflight and robotic exploration
29
Moon and Mars Missions as a first step for solar system exploitation and interstellar
migration
30
Deep Space Exploration and Interstellar missions
33
Future of ISS and Space habitats
33
Policy Recommendations
34
Providing public goods and benefits to Europe and beyond
37
Communications
37
Navigation capabilities
38
Earth Observation: Protecting Humanity
38
Start-ups and increasing accessibility to European Space information from the Copernicus
programme
40
Space, public health and pandemics
40
2


3
Technology transfer, innovation and economic benefits
42
Fostering
European
Space
commercialisation
while
leveraging
on
governmental
involvement
42
Policy Recommendations
43
European and planetary defence
46
European defence: Preserving the integrity of European Space infrastructure, integration
and orbital access
46
Peaceful uses of Outer Space
46
Planetary Defence
48
Policy Recommendations
48
Advanced Space Exploitation
49
Space Mining and In-Situ Resource Utilisation (ISRU)
49
Space exploration to solve energy and material needs
51
Space Based Solar Power (SBSP)
52
Advanced fusion fuels
52
Policy Recommendations
53
Governance and Space institutions in the European and international context
55
European Space institutions
55
European Space Agency or Space Agency of the European Union?
56
Push for a European Union led Space Agency
56
Geo-return policy
57
Role of an International Space Agency (ISA)
58
International Regulatory Agency (IRA)
59
Policy Recommendations
60
Education and outreach
62
Policy Recommendations
62
3


4
I.
Abstract
The European Space sector is a symbol of European integration and collaboration. It
also contributes to the sustainable development of our economy, with every 1 euro
invested in Space returning at least 3-4 euros, according to ESA. Europe is currently a
world leader in earth observation and provides numerous opportunities for small and
medium enterprises (SMEs). Despite this, it was identified that the European nations
are lagging behind compared to other space-faring nations, particularly in Space
exploration and human spaceflight. Furthermore, it is necessary to highlight the
benefits that advanced Space exploitation activities of the full solar system will
achieve, and our Space strategies should account for them. To achieve these visions,
an ambitious exploratory agenda is necessary, European and international governance
institutions should be adapted, and increased funding effort in the European Union is
fundamental. Furthermore, the aspects of “Space balance”, such as the rise of Space
debris, traffic management and the environmental impact of industry, shall be
addressed to ensure a sustainable use of Space. In addition, the Space industry should
get onboard the environmental transition by highlighting and exploiting all the
ecological benefits from Earth observation, Space mining, Space based solar power,
planetary sciences research, and the planetary engineering sciences required for Mars
terraforming.
4


5
II.
Executive Summary
Space is of strategic importance for Europe, and Space needs the European Union.
Investing in Space can improve our daily lives and the European economy by creating
new technologies and jobs while supporting our policies and priorities.
The Space sector generated a global revenue of 271 billion dollars in 20191. The
European Union currently has a global competitive Space sector with satellite
manufacturing capturing a third of the world market. Several SMEs in the European
Union are dedicated to a variety of downstream Space applications. Services, such as
Earth Observation, Navigation, and Communications, currently receive significant
policy support because of their potential contribution to public goods, welfare, and
national security. These technologies improve our daily lives considerably, from
enabling satellite TV, internet and smartphone connections, to precision agriculture,
disaster relief and improving meteorological predictions. They can also be key tools to
mitigate climate change and environmental destruction while contributing to the
Sustainable Development Goals. Although the benefits are clear within the Space
industry, there is a need to increase citizen awareness to boost its public and private
users and fully exploit the advantages in terms of new start-ups, applications and
public support.
In addition to this, spaceflight and -exploration can bring major breakthroughs, and
this policy aims at further increasing European ambitions to enable future advanced
exploitation of the solar system for the benefit of all. Our EU policies should include
the long term strategies of terraforming Mars, Venus, and fixing our planet; the full
solar system, development of Space mining; and future energy concepts such as Space
based solar power and nuclear fusion. Technology developed through programmes
for physics and astronomy research and to explore Mars and the solar system can
achieve major breakthroughs, producing spillover effects and new applications for
Earth. The microgravity environment can bring advantages in the manufacturing of
computer chips and in the biomedical field of research with the development of
treatments,implants, and vaccines. Planetary defence will also allow us to prevent
future asteroid impacts. Indeed, it could be the world's first natural extinction event
preventable by humans. Finding and analysing extraterrestrial life in the solar system
could bring incredible benefits for biology and medical fields while providing valuable
insights into the origin of life on Earth and our role in the Universe. Space can also
help to answer major questions, such as whether we are the only intelligent species in
the Universe, and could provide major insights into the search for extraterrestrial
intelligence. Such a contact could bring incredible technological and cultural
breakthroughs. Future Space habitats could also allow us to shift the bulk of the heavy
1 SIA, State of the Satellite Industry Report, 2019 https://sia.org/22nd_ssir/
5


6
polluting industries to Space and even allow humans to live there, while the
terraforming of Mars will help us to develop the technology not only to live there, but
to geoengineer earth, reverse climate change and foster its biodiversity. Therefore,
we argue to push for larger human Space flight efforts and develop an autonomous
European crewed Space transportation system.
In addition, the Space industry is rapidly changing with the exponential increase in
investment from venture capital. It can be observed how citizen interest is shifting
financial resources to this sector, where the next frontier awaits. This does not mean
governments should recede from Space exploration. Rather, they should take the lead
through commercialisation to enable the growth of a competitive Space industry and
exploit the benefits of the Space market economy to reduce costs and increase Space
access.
We should also remember that Space debris is rapidly increasing, and as with climate
change, it will eventually reach an uncontrollable situation. The Kessler effect, the
accumulation of loose material in Earth’s orbit, has the potential to destroy all of our
Space assets and dreams while also causing irreparable damage to our world's fragile
economy. International agreements currently do not deal with this issue, and the
currently approved voluntary guidelines do not seem to produce a deceleration. With
the rise of Space traffic, the issue will continue to deteriorate, and there is therefore a
need for government intervention in the international field to develop a regulatory
framework for collision avoidance, Space debris mitigation, and active debris removal.
The
objective
of
this
Space
policy
is
to
support
and
provide
valuable
recommendations for Volt members and leaders to achieve these Space objectives,
while supporting public outreach and education.
6


7
How to read this document?
The introduction section contains the reasoning for a Space policy, main vision, goals,
and relevance for each of Volt’s 5+1 challenges. Each of the chapters in this policy
document addresses one of the key policies for Space. At the end of each, the
recommendations are summarised in tabular format. The last chapter specifies the
relevance of the Space policy to Volt’s mapping of policies portfolio, highlighting
specific possible additions and its usefulness as an integrated policy.
7


8
III.
Introduction
This Space policy proposal for Europe is based on two core values: the collaborative
nature of Space, and the need for a larger exploratory vision to guarantee the
advanced sustainable exploitation of Space resources. The following sections will
address why Volt needs a Space policy, our vision, our goals, and the relevance of the
Space policy to Volt’s challenges.
A.Reasoning: Why does Volt need a Space Policy?
Volt’s Space policy was created for various reasons, including:
●
In general, Space policies are not addressed by political associations on
campaign stages. We consider this a failure to empower citizens to address
space-related aspects, benefits, and concerns. Political associations also have a
responsibility to contribute to dissemination, outreach and education, allowing
citizens to make informed decisions. In Europe, this is an unexploited
communication channel.
●
Europe is lagging in Space innovation and is being left behind in the new Space
era, especially in Space transportation, human spaceflight, and Moon and Mars
exploration.
●
There is a global need to push the knowledge and technological frontiers,
which calls for larger Space exploration efforts to eventually exploit the full
benefit of human presence throughout the solar system to sustain economic
growth, reduce inequality, increase our living standards and solve Earth’s
environmental problems.
●
Humanity has to step up to address fundamental challenges and risks to
preserve the legacy of life in the universe. By contributing to Earth observation
programmes to study environmental issues, by becoming a multi-planetary
species and by developing planetary protection systems and effective asteroid
early warning systems, it will be possible to significantly reduce the chances of
extinction of the Earth’s biosphere.
●
A sustainable Space balance is needed to achieve all these goals, and as for
climate change, the Space debris problem has to be tackled before it is too late.
B. Collaborative and Exploratory Vision
Volt believes in a common Space policy that supports European integration and assists
our citizens to overcome the global challenges of our era, such as climate change,
while improving their quality of life. Furthermore, the international Space context is
changing fast. Competition is growing since old and new actors - such as the US,
Russia, China, and India - are engendering renewed challenges and ambitions in Space.
Investment in Space militarisation is rapidly increasing and becoming comparable to
the cold war race, undermining the peaceful uses of outer Space. The resulting
in-space military tests could pose a threat to our orbital resources through the already
8


9
high risk of an uncontrolled escalation of Space debris resulting from the increasingly
crowded Earth's orbits and past unsustainable spacecraft designs. Therefore, there is
a need for regulation comparable to aviation as for collision avoidance and
sustainability.
At the same time, Space activities are becoming increasingly commercial because of
greater involvement of the private sector. In fact, major technological improvements
and new private companies - such as SpaceX, Virgin Galactic and Rocket Lab - are
changing the traditional industrial and business models in the Space sector. These
developments are making access to Space and the widespread use of Space
technologies in our everyday lives easier and cheaper, as has been done with solar
technology, medical tools, and fire-fighting equipment. Furthermore, Space flight
activities enhance innovation by inspiring society. As an example, the Apollo
programme led to an increase in science and advanced engineering degrees2, which
would later contribute to improving our world and achieving technological and
scientific breakthroughs.
A common policy on Space is of strategic importance for Europe3. The Space industry
does not only foster innovation, wellbeing and economic growth4, but it also
reinforces Europe’s role as a global player and it is an asset for its security and
defence, both inside and outside its borders. Space is inherently a transnational and
global environment. As such, it requires strategic policies to maintain the geopolitical
and market balance and, at the same time, it offers opportunities for greater
international integration and collaboration. In fact, Space exploration and its
resources have the potential to enable humanity to become multi-planetary, mitigate
the risks of asteroid impacts, and contribute to solving our biggest challenges, such as
the current energy and environmental crisis. It should be noted that Space is at the
frontier of technology and research, using the best of our capabilities, and that these
are the main drivers to sustain social productivity and economic growth in the
information era5.
Affordable space-access will not only provide worldwide internet-access, fast
inter-continental travel, and enable Space tourism, but will someday allow us to shift
heavy industries outside of our delicate world. Creating the resources needed by
recycling available materials (In-situ resource utilisation) allows us to further explore
5 Long, X. Scientific and technological innovation related to real economic growth, ISSN: 2516-1652
4 K. W. George, 2018, “The Economic Impacts of the Commercial Space Industry”, Space Policy 47,
181-186
3 All member states have decided that integrating space into the European society and economy,
encouraging a globally competitive European space sector, ensuring european autonomy in space
access in a cost effective and sustainable way are major goals. European Ministers Ready ESA for a
United Space in Europe in the Era of Space 4.0, ESA, December 2016.
2 NASA, 2015, Historical Studies in the Societal Impact of Spaceflight, p. 531.
9


10
the solar system, and through asteroid mining, we will retrieve key materials such as
cobalt and other rare earth-metals needed for our environmental transition. This
would not only decrease their value, but would make new technologies available for
everyone. The colonisation of Mars and other solar system bodies will foster
innovation, leading to large breakthroughs in all knowledge fields that will benefit
society through technological transfer, as for efficient water-scarce agriculture
practises for desert regions. The subsequent terraforming activities - deliberately
altering a planet’s atmosphere to make it more suitable for humans - will also provide
us with the tools to manage our Earth’s climate and environment to prevent climate
change, enhance biodiversity and assure its conservation and sustainability for
millennia.
Furthermore, access to Space, the Moon and the outer solar system will allow for
Space based solar power and unlock huge amounts of helium-3 reserves, which will be
necessary to power an increasing population on a future resource depleted Earth,
especially in the case of renewable energy not meeting all world demands. Primary
energy consumption may double by 2100, while fossil fuel reserves may last for
100-150 years at-most6. Furthermore, because of the current environmental crisis,
there is an approximate carbon budget of around 120 gigatonnes to limit the world’s
temperature below 1.5 degrees with a 66% probability7, which means that only about
20% of the remaining fossil fuel reserves are available for consumption. Uranium
reserves may help for some years, but eventually alternatives will be required. Fusion
energy based on deuterium/helium-3 may provide the capability, the Moon and the
Gas Giants the energy source, Space habitats and ISRU the infrastructure and Space
transportation the means to get there.
7 IPCC, AR5 Synthesis Report: Climate Change 2014, available at https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/syr/
6 BP, Statistical Review of World Energy, available at
https://www.bp.com/en/global/corporate/energy-economics/statistical-review-of-world-energy/downl
oads.html
10


11
Currently, the European Union is one of the world's leaders in exploiting earth
observation technologies. In this exploratory policy, Volt wants to acknowledge these
achievements, and increase efforts in human spaceflight,exploration, and science.
Policy actions implemented now should account for long term strategic objectives of
evolutionary growth, sustainable exploitation of the full solar system and reduction of
our dependence on Earth’s critical resources, starting with the European Union
playing a pivotal role in human spaceflight, lunar and mars exploration missions along
with our international partners89. These actions will also spillover with long term
exploitation applications and technology transfer for the benefits of the Earth, as
explained with Space based solar power, Space mining, and helium-3 reserves. To
achieve all this, the legal, political, and technical challenges must be solved, such as
enhancing our Space transportation sector with state-of-the-art sustainable Space
access capabilities and autonomous crew capabilities, and enabling the development
of suborbital commercial flight. In addition, it is necessary to ensure a “Space balance”
to assure the long term sustainability of Space resources by solving the current Space
debris issue, establishing traffic management regulations and guaranteeing a fair
9 Collaboration can enable large space projects in the post cold war era.  Pedersen, K. S., Thoughts on
international space cooperation and interests in the post-cold war world, Space Policy, 8(3), 205–220.
doi:10.1016/0265-9646(92)90050-6
8 International cooperation is seen as key for achieving a sustainable space infrastructure and economy
for solar system exploration and interstellar migration. Jones, R. M. Synthesis of a Space Infrastructure,
Proceedings of Space 90, Second International Conference, Engineering, Construction and Operations
in Space II, 1990
11


12
distribution of their benefits among our world citizens.
To conclude, Volt believes that to ensure Europe’s and the world's prosperity, the
European Space agencies and industry should increase their exploratory ambitions
and become leaders in scientific, explorational, and human Space flight activities in
Space. Expanding human presence into the solar system will allow for an open-ended
future for humanity with prosperous growth in an environment unconstrained by
energy, Space and material bounds10. This policy provides recommendations and
guidelines to get there.
C. Space Policy Goals and Objectives
Our Space policy wants the European Union to be the leader in making humanity a
Space faring civilization by proposing a deeply explorative and utilising agenda. We
want a groundbreaking increase in efforts to research and develop technologies to
explore the universe and to exploit Space resources, from our near-earth Space with
fundamental
applications
for
earth
observation,
climate
change
studies,
communications and navigation, to Space mining for key resources, the use of
space-based solar power for our energy needs, and the colonisation and terraforming
of Mars and other celestial bodies. To achieve these goals, we believe that a
collaborative and transparent policy is needed, supported by a long-term European
plan to foster Space education. These goals can be summarised as follows:
➢Exploratory strategy
○
Push for Space Exploration
○
Investment in infrastructure, innovation and technology development
➢Encouraging the collaborative nature of Space in Europe and abroad
○
The European Union shall be an equal and key partner in international
Space sciences and exploration missions
○
Encouraging international regulatory frameworks for sustainable Space
exploration
➢Securing European strategic and autonomous capabilities
○
Guaranteeing
a
cost-effective
and
sustainable
European
Space
transportation infrastructure with crew-rated capabilities
○
Fostering European human Space flight activities
○
Launching ambitious Space exploration missions to the solar system
➢Sustainability
○
Space Debris Mitigation
○
Contribution to mitigate humanity’s environmental impact
○
Mitigation of the Space industry’s ecological impact
10 Hammond, W. E. , Space Transportation: A systems approach to analysis and Design, 1999
12


13
➢Investment in Public Goods
○
Contribution to society and welfare
○
To sustain ambitious projects and enable commercialisation of Space
➢Space Culture
○
Large public outreach
○
Support for Space education
D. Relevance for Volt’s 5+1 Challenges
Volt Space Policy will serve the greater objectives of Volt. In order to do so, the goals
of the policy are filtered through the 5+1 challenges that Volt aims to tackle with its
activities.
1. Smart State
Governments should provide state-of-the-art public services for the benefit of
their citizens and residents. Space science related achievements can improve
transparency and decision-making thanks to high-quality real-time data produced by
our Space infrastructure.
13


14
2. Economic Renaissance
European economies must be the engine of society’s progress and allow for
a decent living standard for everyone. Investing in the Space sector would foster the
EU's leadership in innovation. The EU is investing over €14 billion in Space activities for
the period 2021-2027. The return on investment is estimated to be really high
compared to other possibilities. Indeed, it is estimated to have a direct return of €3-4
for every euro allocated.11 Advanced exploitation capabilities from Space mining,
Space based solar power and colonisation of other planets could result in even higher
returns.
3. Social Equality
Space activities contribute to all the Sustainable Development Goals. One of
its goals is to reduce inequality and ensure fairness. For example, the proposal for
Space-based solar power or satellite internet mega constellations will allow energy to
reach inaccessible places in less developed regions. The policy also calls for promoting
women in Space and other STEM fields.
4. Global Balance
We want to establish policies in line with the Sustainable Development Goals.
Space applications cover all the 17 SDGs, making it a fundamental domain to develop
in order to tackle global challenges and strengthen the EU’s global role. Satellite
technology is key for understanding and mitigating climate change and for better
forecasting
to
support
renewable
energy
infrastructure.
In
addition,
Space
sustainability, or “Space balance” shall also be pursued, addressing the alarming rise in
Space debris with mitigation, active removal and Space traffic management
strategies, and by mitigating Space missions and launching environmental impact
through eco-design principles.12
12 European Space Agency (ESA), Ecodesign, available
at:https://www.esa.int/Safety_Security/Clean_Space/ecodesign
11 EU space policy - Consilium (europa.eu)
14


15
5. Citizen Empowerment
At the core of this Space policy is a 2 year policy process involving volters of
all chapters. Furthermore, our policy addresses the need for larger outreach
activities and education in Space studies to enable informed citizens who know about
the benefits and opportunities that Space offers.
6. EU Reform
The policy addresses the need for greater collaboration in Space matters in
the European Union, and a larger financial effort to achieve our exploratory and
exploitation goals and to guarantee the technological transfer and involvement of
non-space sectors. One of its core proposals is the creation of a European Union Space
Agency encompassing ESA and EUSPA activities (TBD).
IV.
Space as the next frontier for science and
discovery
Since the beginning of the Space Age, access to Space has stimulated the
development of brand-new branches of science that were previously unknown, from
planetology to high-energy astrophysics, from exobiology to gravitational wave
astrophysics. Consequently, deeper questions about our universe have followed.
Recent
technological
advances,
together
with
the
leadership
and
reliability
demonstrated by ESA and its international partners, brought us to the verge of a new
epoch of scientific discovery, where answers to some of the most fundamental
questions might be dealt with.
For instance, ESA’s Planck satellite launched in 2009 performed an unprecedented
mapping of the anisotropies of the cosmic microwave background radiation and it
provided us with the most precise measurements of the main cosmological
parameters, such as the density of matter and dark matter, the age of the universe
and the Hubble constant. XMM-Newton, ESA’s largest X-ray observatory, was
launched in 1999, and it is still perfectly functioning and providing us an
unprecedented view of the high-energy phenomena in the universe that shine in the
X-rays, such as accreting black holes, supernovas, and galaxy clusters. The next decade
will see the development and launch of new large missions led by ESA, just to name a
few: the first space-based gravitational wave observatory LISA, the largest X-ray
observatory ever made, Athena, and the astrobiology mission to Mars, ExoMars, that
will land a rover on the red planet.
15


16
From this perspective, Volt believes that Europe should and can be a leading player in
this endeavour. Innovative methods and technologies developed for science will
provide a strategic competitive edge and benefits for our society and economy. Volt
supports increasing EU funding in Space sciences, which is required to develop
long-term research projects that will improve our knowledge of the physical world
and that will keep Europe at the forefront of international research.
Volt supports ESA becoming a funding agency for Space research and cultural projects
carried out by its member states. This would allow ESA to directly support Space
research and outreach activities across Europe in a more harmonised and coordinated
way. In fact, relying mostly on national agencies to fund Space research has shown
several disadvantages, such as limited funding, dependence on the current national
political choices, limited international collaborations, limited competition and risk
aversion. This is why Volt fully supports continued and increased funding in Space
science from the EU and commercial entities.
A.Space Physics and Astronomy
Space research is crucial for the technical development of humanity, like quantum
communications, better air transport, better and cleaner energy management, mining
asteroids, etc. Also, there is research that is not directly related to society in the short
term, such as gravitational wave observation from Space, astronomy, or geodesy, but
which could bring major breakthroughs and eventual life changing applications.
Talking about quantum communications, Chinese researchers, just in 2017, teleported
information from Earth to a satellite over a distance of 1400 km13. This experiment
can't be done horizontally (the maximum is 144 km, achieved in an experiment in Las
Canarias, Spain14) because atmospheric turbulence breaks the quantum state.
Temperature and the absence of seismic vibrations make Space attractive for the
study of gravitational waves. ESA already saw the potential of Space for these
purposes with the project LISA (Laser Interferometer Space Antenna). Moreover, for
technical reasons, Space and terrestrial gravitational wave observatories are not
competitive, but complementary.
B. Search for life
Recent progress in the fields of astrobiology and astronomy, findings of possible
14 Herbst, Thomas, et al., 2015, Teleportation of entanglement over 143 km, Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 112.46 (2015): 14202-14205.
13 Ren, J., Xu, P., Yong, H. et al., 2017 Ground-to-satellite quantum teleportation. Nature 549, 70–73,
available at: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature23675
16


17
habitable conditions on Mars and the Jovian Planet’s moons or “icy worlds” and
discoveries of extremophiles on Earth which can survive extreme environments have
led to speculation that life may be thriving in the universe. Currently, large efforts are
being focused on astrobiology research on Mars, after the discovery of several
habitable hotspots and even systems of subsurface lakes resembling Earth’s
subsurface glacial lakes. The European Space Agency (ESA) is looking to launch the
Exomars in collaboration with NASA. The primary mission goal is to determine if there
has ever been life on Mars, and to better understand the history of water on the
planet.15 The launch has been delayed as the ESA originally collaborated with the
Roscosmos Space Corporation, however the collaboration has been suspended as a
result of the war in Ukraine.
Furthermore, exoplanet research has been progressing at advanced leaps since the
first confirmed detection of an exoplanet in 1992, which has led to the discoveries of
rare planetary systems and allows us to understand how common habitable planets
are in the universe. Recently, potentially habitable planets have been discovered in
our closest solar system, Alpha Centauri, which is raising these prospects. With the
future launch of observation telescopes, it will be possible to study their atmospheres
and perhaps obtain the first image of an Earth twin. Looking for habitable exoplanets
is not only a merit of its own, but by studying their geology, atmosphere and
ecosystems, it will be possible to further understand our planet's atmosphere and
ocean dynamics, which could contribute to incredible advances in terms of climate
science and planetary engineering. Up to now, there have been two dedicated ESA
missions for exoplanet research, CoRoT and CHEOPS, while future missions such as
Ariel and Plato are devised16.
In addition to the search for life in our solar system and exoplanet detection, there
have been research efforts in the search and detection of intelligent extraterrestrial
life. If another civilization is present within our interstellar neighbourhood, as
predicted by the Drake Equation, and would attempt to contact us, our current
technological knowledge foresees two main methods: radio communication or
sending interstellar probes17. Recently, the first two interstellar objects were
discovered, Oumuamua and Borisov, which raises these possibilities18 and calls for
future rendezvous missions.
18 Loeb, Avi, 2020, Let’s Search for Alien Probes, Not Just Alien Signals, Scientific American, Opinion,
December 22, 2020, available at
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/lets-search-for-alien-probes-not-just-alien-signals/
17 Bracewell, R., 1960, Communications from superior galactic communities, Nature 186, 670–671
(1960), available at: https://doi.org/10.1038/186670a0
16 Exoplanet Mission Timeline:
https://sci.esa.int/web/exoplanets/-/60649-exoplanet-mission-timeline
15 European Space Agency (ESA), N° 6–2020: ExoMars to take off for the Red Planet in 2022, available at:
https://www.esa.int/Newsroom/Press_Releases/ExoMars_to_take_off_for_the_Red_Planet_in_2022
17


18
Furthermore, there have also been efforts to search for intelligent extraterrestrial
signals, whether intentional or as a consequence of artificial “leakage” . Serious
concepts to perform targeted searches and full sky surveys with current technology
and within limited budgets have been proposed over the years, as with NASA’s Project
Cyclops19. This project aimed to search for extraterrestrial beacons within the
microwave “water hole” frequency window between spectral lines of hydrogen (1420
MHz) and the hydroxyl radical (1662 MHz), which is hypothesised as a potential
communication channel. Workshops at the time also concluded that it was timely and
feasible to perform serious searches with modest resources and enormous spillover
benefits20, and numerous leading scientists, including Carl Salgan and seven Nobel
prize winners, urged a systematic worldwide search for extraterrestrial intelligence21.
Research and development efforts continued with worldwide searches, including
European Union member states and a NASA official SETI programme, with projects
such as the HRMS search, which has currently studied a minuscule fraction of our
galaxy. Future concepts include highly efficient ultraviolet receivers constructed
directly in Space or on the Moon, preventing atmospheric absorption22.
In the HRMS search, cost figures were considered unacceptable within the political
sphere and prevented their continuation, forcing most SETI efforts to continue under
the SETI Institute umbrella with the help of private donors, such as Paul Allen. Its high
public interest combined with enormous media coverage combined with its small
budget share compared to other NASA activities prevented broad geopolitical
support. Only recently, a dedicated budget for technology-signatures search has been
granted23. SETI research is essentially an easy political target24, and requires adequate
support. It is therefore necessary to increase European SETI research efforts, and we
support the creation of a European Space Agency (ESA) division for SETI research
and the development of a long term comprehensive plan in combination with
other Space agencies and the scientific community.
Volt also supports the inclusion of astrobiology sciences, including SETI research,
in school curricula in all the European Union.
24 Garber, S. J., 1999, Searching for Good Science: The Cancellation of NASA’s SETI Program, Journal of
the British Interplanetary Society, Volume 52
23 Kaufman, M., Technosignatures and the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence, available at:
https://astrobiology.nasa.gov/news/technosignatures-and-the-search-for-extraterrestrial-intelligence/
22 Ross, M. et al., 2011, Optical SETI: Moving Toward the Light, in Searching for Extraterrestrial
Intelligence - SETI Past, Present, and Future, Shuch, H. Paul, Springer-Verlag
21 Sagan, C., Extraterrestrial Intelligence: An International Petition, Science, Volume 218, 1982
20 Philip Morrison, John Billingham, John Wolfe, 1979, The search for extraterrestrial intelligence—SETI,
Acta Astronautica, Volume 6, Issues 1–2, 1979, available at:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/0094576579901437
19 NASA, 1972, Technical Report CR-114445 - Project Cyclops: A design study of a system for detecting
extraterrestrial intelligent life
18


19
C. Policy Recommendations
R.1.1. Increase efforts for astrophysics and exoplanet research.
R.1.2. Favour the design and development of sample return missions as a means
to further increase the European contribution to the world scientific
community.
R.1.3. Creation of an ESA division for Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence
(SETI) research and development of a long term comprehensive plan in
combination with other Space agencies and the scientific community.
R.1.4. Inclusion of astrophysics and astrobiology sciences, including SETI
research, in school curricula in all the European union.
19


20
V.
Space
Balance:
Space
Debris
and
the
Sustainable Use of Space
A.Space Debris and Space Traffic Management
Space might seem big enough, but the number of spacecraft populating it is following
a near-exponential curve. Threats to the integrity of the orbital environment are
driven by the development of large constellations, which enable excellent coverage
and unparalleled resilience but also crowd key orbits, small cubesats with little safety
margins25, the persistent threat of uncontrolled/old/malfunctioning spacecraft,
military demonstrations in which states wish to show their capability to destroy
satellites, and the inherent risk of micro-meteoroids and larger objects.
The ever-increasing risk of collision would not only impact the colliding objects, but
would create a chain reaction, known as the “Kessler syndrome,”26 that would cascade
to all objects in the same or neighbouring orbits. This not only puts the critical Space
infrastructure (telecommunications, observation, navigation, weather forecasts…) at
great risk, but would also prevent further use of the affected orbit.
Today, there are no formal regulations, nor incentives for the Space industry to build
and operate responsibly, preventing such events. The US monitors orbits and shares
the data with its partners; its FCC agency allocates frequency rights linked to the
rights to operate in given orbits; startups such as LeoLabs provide a tracking service;
and the World Economic Forum is providing a “Space Sustainability Rating” to rank
satellites according to de-orbiting and debris mitigation strategies.
We, however, believe it is the role of independent institutions to preserve the
integrity of orbits and their assets. Concretely, Europe should spearhead the
creation of an independent international body, further described in Chapter 8,
responsible for the following:
➢Transparent and collaborative tracking and cataloguing of all objects in the
Earth’s
vicinity,
providing
a
consistent,
complete
and
up-to-date
characterization of objects;
26 Kessler, Donald J., Cour‐Palais, Burton G., 1978, Collision frequency of artificial satellites: The
creation of a debris belt, Journal of Geophysical Research, 83: 2637–2646
25 See Swarm Technologies and FCC settlement, available at:
https://www.theverge.com/2018/12/20/18150684/swarm-technologies-illegal-satellite-launch-fcc-settl
ement-fine
20


21
➢Well-organised and sustainable allocation of orbits for new spacecraft;
➢Traffic management with a defined “Space Code of Conduct”, attributing
manoeuvring priorities, and supporting legal issues and  insurance cases;
➢Enforce the legal obligation to design for safe collision avoidance manoeuvres
and safe de-orbiting.
This regulatory body would ideally be gradually equipped with capabilities to use
“Space tugs” positioned in critical orbits, to assist with de-orbiting and collision
avoidance, through robotic and/or laser technology, and an advanced analytics centre
to process the data and anticipate scenarios as ahead as possible. As a bridge to the
aforementioned vision, we propose to:
➢Increase financial support to the Clean Space initiative27 and others for
Space debris mitigation strategies, especially for projects aiming at direct
removal of large objects, which shall develop an operational removal system
before 2030;
➢All public Space activities should implement debris mitigation measures
and mandatory decommissioning. Private companies could be subjected to
national law penalties for non-conformance28 and funding conditions when
accessing grants, loans and other government benefits;
➢Introduce regulations aiming at the mandatory decommissioning of all
launched
Space
objects
within
the
European
and
national
laws29.
Regulations analogous to the Emission Trading System to impose mechanisms
for monetary penalisation of debris generating techniques and processes could
also be explored;
➢Use trade sanctions to ensure these regulations are met and push for an
international agreement to set procedures and guidelines for automated
collision avoidance systems through ICAO and EASA;
➢Push for a UN Space Treaty to implement legally mandatory guidelines for
Space debris mitigation for all member states;
➢Raise awareness of the Space debris problem to empower European citizens
and their political and economic leaders so that they become aware of the
29 Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COPUOS), Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines and
European Space Agency (ESA), available at: ESA Space Debris Mitigation Compliance Verification
Guidelines
28 Pelton, J. N., 2015, New solutions for the space debris problem. Cham: Springer
27 European Space Agency (ESA), Clean space, available at: Clean Space
21


22
potential global threat30.
Furthermore, mega-constellations offer a unique Space architecture that can enable
many applications, from precise navigation technology to worldwide internet access.
Nevertheless, the increase of Space objects requires adequate traffic management
and debris mitigation regulations as proposed in this text. In addition, luminosity
contamination assessments shall be performed for European Space missions and
adherence to regulations in European and national law shall be determined following
the assessments and recommendations from the astronomy community.31
B. Eco-design principles and the Sustainable Use of Space
Space applications can have enormous advantages in combating climate change and
environmental
destruction.
Nevertheless,
within
the
Space
industry
the
environmental burdens will continue to increase along with the expected growth in
the sector as envisioned for this strategy. Although the impact of the industry remains
low when compared to other sectors, it may still be possible to further reduce its
impact and act as a technological symbol. As a result, along with all of our human
activities,
it
is
necessary to thoroughly investigate its potential impact for
accountability. The United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
has adopted guidelines to ensure the long-term sustainability of the Space industry,
with the 27th mentioning the use of technologies to minimise the environmental
impact of manufacturing and launching Space assets32. In the European Union,
inter-sectoral environmental regulations already affect some aspects of the Space
industry, and some national legislation exists that particularly addresses the Space
industry, as in France with the Space Operations Act, aiming to make operators
responsible for the prevention of risks to humans and the environment33. Volt Europa
already promotes ambitious actions to regulate and mitigate these environmental
effects, which are applied to all industries, such as for climate change with the
proposed Hybrid Emission System and strict emission reduction objectives. We
therefore propose to push for the adoption of these guidelines at national and
European legislative levels to investigate and mitigate the Space sector's impact
on humans and the environment with Life Cycle Assessments (LCA).
33 Maury, T., Loubet, P., Serrano, S. M., Gallice, A., Sonnemann, G., 2020 Application of environmental life
cycle assessment (LCA) within the space sector: A state of the art, Acta Astronautica, available at: doi:
10.1016/j.actaastro.2020.01.035
32 UNOOSA, Guidelines for the Long-Term Sustainability of Outer Space Activities of the Committee on
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space Adopted, Press Release, 2019
31 It is advised to keep close track of their recommendations and workshops, as of the recent UNOOSA
workshop, available at Dark and Quiet Skies for Science and Society
30 Pelton, J. N.. 2015, New solutions for the space debris problem, Cham: Springer
22


23
C. Policy Recommendations
R.2.1. Europe should spearhead the creation of an independent international
body equipped with capabilities to use “Space tugs'' positioned in critical
orbits, to assist with de-orbiting and collision avoidance, through robotic
and/or laser technology, and an advanced analytics centre to process the data
and anticipate scenarios as far ahead as possible. It would be responsible for:
1. Transparent and collaborative tracking and cataloguing of all objects in
the Earth’s vicinity, providing a consistent, complete and up-to-date
characterization of objects;
2. Well-organised and sustainable allocation of orbits for new spacecraft;
3. Traffic management with a defined “Space Code of Conduct”,
attributing manoeuvring priorities, and supporting legal issues and
insurance cases;
4. Enforce the legal obligation to design for safe collision avoidance
manoeuvres and safe de-orbiting.
R.2.2. Increase financial support to the Clean Space initiative34 and others for
Space debris mitigation strategies, especially for projects aiming at direct
removal of large objects, which shall develop an operational removal
system before 2030.
R.2.3. All public Space activities shall implement debris mitigation measures
and mandatory decommissioning. Private companies could be subjected to
national law penalties for non-conformance35 and funding conditions
when accessing grants, loans and other government benefits.
R.2.4. Introduce regulations aiming at the mandatory decommissioning of all
launched
Space objects within the European and national laws3637.
Regulations analogous to the Emission Trading System to impose mechanisms
for monetary penalisation of debris generating techniques and processes
could also be explored.
R.2.5. Use trade sanctions to ensure these regulations are met and push for
an
international
agreement
to
set
procedures
and
guidelines
for
automated collision avoidance systems through ICAO and EASA.
R.2.6. Push for a UN Space Treaty to implement legally mandatory guidelines
37 European Space Agency (ESA), available at: ESA Space Debris Mitigation Compliance Verification
Guidelines
36 Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COPUOS), Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines
35 Pelton, J. N.,  2015, New solutions for the space debris problem, Cham: Springer.
34 European Space Agency (ESA), Clean Space, available at: Clean Space
23


24
for Space debris mitigation to all member states.
R.2.7. Raise awareness of the Space debris problem to empower European
citizens and their political and economic leaders so that they become aware
of the potential global threat38.
R.2.8. Perform luminosity contamination assessments for European Space
missions and enforce regulations in European and national law following the
assessments and recommendations from the astronomy community.39
R.2.9. Make operators responsible for the prevention of risks to humans and
the environment40, following the French Space Operators Act, at national
and European legislative level, to investigate and mitigate the Space
sector’s impact on humans and the environment with Life Cycle Assessments
(LCA).
40 Maury, T., Loubet, P., Serrano, S. M., Gallice, A.,  Sonnemann, G., 2020, Application of environmental
life cycle assessment (LCA) within the space sector: A state of the art, Acta Astronautica, available at:
doi: 10.1016/j.actaastro.2020.01.035
39 It is advised to keep close track of their recommendations and workshops, as of the recent UNOOSA
workshop, available at: Dark and Quiet Skies for Science and Society
38 Pelton, J. N., 2015, New solutions for the space debris problem, Cham: Springer.
24


25
VI.
Revolutionising
European
Space
Transportation Sector
European Space Transportation has been incredibly successful with the development
of the Ariane and Vega families. The Ariane 4 was able to capture more than half of
the global commercial satellite market in 199741.
We are now entering the ”New Space” era and this picture is changing. There is a need
for innovations in the Space access sector at the European level, as new actors have
entered
the
global
Space
transportation
industry,
introducing
technological
breakthroughs, such as reusability and dedicated small satellite launchers. This has led
to an aggressive reduction of launch costs in all market segments, which will foster
the development of the Space industry but might threaten European competitiveness
and autonomy. There are also new applications on the near horizon, from the
launching of mega constellations, to the suborbital market with intercontinental
travel, Space tourism and scientific research, which will depend on the development
of new technologies and require ramping up European efforts to benefit from its
market returns. Furthermore, we are currently in an ecological and climate crisis,
which requires revolutionary transformation within the industry. Volt already
proposes to include a carbon price in accordance with our 1.5 degree goals in all
sectors, and Space transportation should also be accounted for. It is also necessary to
conduct further lifecycle analysis to determine the full environmental impact before a
matured Space access and suborbital travel industry is fully operational. The sector
should also be involved in Space debris mitigation by adequately decommissioning all
stages, as the upper stages represent 20% of the total Space debris.
In addition to reusability, new unconventional launch methods are being slowly
developed which could revolutionise Space access, such as Space elevators,
rocket-based combined air breathing propulsion and spaceplanes, sky hook concepts,
and sled launch. It is important to also support the development of those, as in the
long run, they will enable us to beat the rocket equation and guarantee affordable
Space access. To bridge the gap, there are other more near term concepts, such as
reusing rocket stages, air or balloon launches, and innovative strategies to reduce
costs, from extensive use of 3D printing technology, to reducing subcontracting and
revisiting the distributed production chain and the European geo-return policy.
Introducing commercialisation and competition in the launch transportation sector
with
new
private
actors
could
also
incentivise the development of newer,
cost-effective concepts.
Although there are some current European projects and historical attempts, the
investment in the development of these systems is minuscule compared to what is
being done in the USA, China, or other countries (up to date, only American rockets
41 Hammond, W. E, 1999, Space Transportation: A systems approach to analysis and Design
25


26
have been reused, and no small European rocket companies are operating). There are
also many potential concepts, limited budgets and workforce, and therefore some
sort of coordination is required.
The strategy therefore calls for an ambitious European coordinated roadmap to
develop fully reusable and sustainable operational concepts with public-private
partnerships, that could eventually hand over their operations to different companies
to foster commercialisation and further reduce costs. In addition, it will foster
European
competitions
for
innovative
launch
and
other
Space
exploration
technologies to promote the investment of venture capital, based on the success of
the X Prize challenge.
In addition, crewed launchers have not yet been developed in Europe, which threatens
our strategic autonomy for human spaceflight. The development of the Ariane 5 was
initially proposed to substitute the successful Ariane 4 for a human rated launcher,
but the proposals for crewed upper stages were eventually abandoned, and there are
no plans for a human rated Ariane 6. As mentioned in the next section this is key for
Space exploration, to improve welfare and public health, and to enable key
technologies to fight environmental destruction. The strategy also calls for the
development of European crewed launch systems.
Furthermore, a network of spaceports with universal launch facilities will be required
when Space tourism and intercontinental suborbital travel take off. Small spaceports
for small launchers and sounding rockets are also being developed in northern Europe
because of their privileged position for Sun Synchronous Orbits, and the policy should
incentivise their construction. European spaceports for larger launchers may also be
pursued, as although their non-equatorial position would reduce their performance,
their simplified transportation logistics might allow for cost effective operations of
reusable vehicles. We therefore propose to push for the construction of spaceports
in continental Europe.
A.Advanced
In-space
Transportation:
Propulsion
and
Power Sources
Considering in-space transportation, traditional chemical rockets, while powerful,
have significant weight requirements. This calls for advanced in-space propulsion
concepts such as solar sailing and electric propulsion. Electric propulsion devices
produce far lower thrust than chemical rockets, but they are significantly more
propellant efficient. The resulting spacecraft mass reduction allows for new mission
profiles.42 For electric propulsion, Europe currently funds these devices through the
42 The electric propulsion devices have been used to cost-effectively extend the life times of low
orbiting satellites such as GOCE.
26


27
EPIC project43, part of the Horizon 2020 programme. We recommend increasing
funding for the follow up of this and similar projects.
Another interesting venue to explore with respect to plasma propulsion is synergy
with nuclear fusion research. The opportunities for synergy between fusion research
and electric propulsion research are vast because both fields face similar questions
when manipulating plasma4445. If made available for human Space flight, this could
drastically reduce trip times for interplanetary missions, such as an Earth-Mars
mission, thus minimising radiation exposure for astronauts46. There are also additional
technologies
which
might
bring
breakthroughs,
such
as
fission
propulsion,
Magneto-Inertial Fusion47 and the Mach effect thruster.
Currently, most satellites depend on solar panels for onboard power. Solar insolation
decreases when moving further away from the sun48. This limits the available power
for deep Space missions with solar panels. For missions further into the outer region
of the solar system, it will be necessary to rely on Radio-isotope Thermoelectric
Generators (RTGs)49. Since 2009, RTGs using Americium-241 as a heat source have
been developed as part of an ESA funded programme50. Americium can be separated
from spent nuclear fuel using current nuclear reprocessing. This way RTGs provide a
market for the reuse of nuclear waste51. Furthermore, some electric propulsion
concepts, such as VASIMIR and Magnetoplasmadynamic-Thrusters have high input
power requirements (100-500 KW), which could be provided by a nuclear reactor.
Therefore, we encourage the further development and deployment of RTGs, and
feasibility studies should be done on space-born nuclear reactors.
B. Policy Recommendations
R.3.1. Implement an ambitious European coordinated roadmap to develop fully
reusable and sustainable operational concepts for all parload market
segments
(big
and
small
dedicated
launchers)
with
public
private
partnerships, which could hand in their operations to different companies to
51 Hammond W., 1999, Space Transportation: A Systems Approach to Analysis and Design
50 Ambrosi, R.M., Williams, H., Watkinson, E.J. et al., 2019, European Radioisotope Thermoelectric
Generators (RTGs) and Radioisotope Heater Units (RHUs) for Space Science and Exploration. Space Sci
Rev 215, 55 (2019), available at: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11214-019-0623-9
49 https://www.space.com/692-esa-chief-europe-space-nuclear-power-options.html
48 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inverse-square_law
47 Several American Universities are investigating this concept in cooperation with NASA. For example
the University of Washington,Princeton, University of Huntsville Alabama.
46 Aime P., Gajeri, M., Kezerashvili, R., 2020, Exploration of trans-Neptunian objects using Direct Fusion
Drive.
45 An example of a fusion research  inspired plasma propulsion device is VASIMR
44 Comunidad de Madrid, Prometeo Project. Also see an example of a fusion research  inspired plasma
propulsion device is VASIMR
43 European Space Agency (ESA), 2014-2020 EPIC project
27


28
fostering commercialisation and further cost reduction while guaranteeing a
successful social pay off.
R.3.2. Develop an European crewed launch system to guarantee strategic
autonomy, support our human Space flight programme and to enable europe
to participate in future intercontinental suborbital travel.
R.3.3. Introduce European competitions for innovative launch and other Space
exploration technologies to promote the investment of venture capital.
R.3.4. Support research of the environmental impact of Space transportation
infrastructure regarding ozone depletion, mesospheric and stratospheric
cloud formation, global warming, environmental and human toxicity and
Space debris mitigation.
R.3.5. Invest in future unconventional launch concepts such as skyhook systems,
orbital airships, magnetically assisted launches, and Space elevators. Push for
international collaboration for its development.
R.3.6. Push for the construction of spaceports in continental Europe for all
launcher sectors to support the European launch industry and suborbital
intercontinental travel applications.
R.3.7. Explore and devise a flagship exploration mission using advanced electric
propulsion and solar sailing.
R.3.8. Support the development and deployment of RTGs for deep Space
exploration missions.
R.3.9. Promote feasibility studies on novel advanced in-space propulsion and
power concepts such as fusion propulsion, onboard nuclear reactors, the
alcubierre drive and the mach effect thruster through the establishment of
European advanced propulsion concepts directorate.
28


29
VII.
European
human
spaceflight
and
robotic
exploration
Europe has built world-class capabilities in exploration, whether on its own for
robotics missions (Rosetta), or with international partners in human spaceflight
through the International Space Station programme and its ecosystem. Exploration
embodies the far future of mankind; it confronts us with the greatest unknowns while
offering a horizon of possibilities. It stands for technological prowess and sovereign
pride. It has managed in the last 3 decades to overcome national barriers and bring
remarkable international cooperation; and Europe has heavily invested in occupying a
significant seat in its development. All that has been done in the field so far is surely
“exploratory”, but an age of “utilisation” will come. Its building blocks are assembling
now, and Europe should not be left behind. Human spaceflight enables enormous
flexibility when it comes to Space missions, and can bring significant advancements in
life-sciences and medicine fields, as well as complementary advantages for in-orbit
servicing operations, enabling satellite reparations and refuelling opportunities to
extend mission lifetimes while fostering sustainability.
The future of human spaceflight is taking once again a geopolitical turn, as the US
progressively disengages from the ISS and strives for the Artemis programme, hoping
to onboard international partners along the way. As of today, only US defence
partners have signed, with the exception of Luxembourg. Europe's investment should
not have been made in vain, and more importantly, should not solely support the US
interests now that we are acquiring means towards strategic autonomy. The following
points could leverage Europe's achievements in creating a sustainable, inclusive Space
economy, while preserving strategic, independent access:
1. Bridge ground industries (for example, pharmaceuticals, fluids, energy,
construction/manufacturing, telecommunications...) with the Space industry to
develop purpose-built modules (s) for large-scale production applications that
take advantage of the unique Space environment. These applications can be
divided into two categories: Earth Benefits and Space Benefits, with the latter
focusing on developing sustainable trade in Space. These should also enable
crewed applications, which will be decided on a case-by-case basis and
pending on member states' priorities, which may eventually replace the ISS
European activities;
2. Evolve Orion ESM and the EL3 plans (European Large Lunar Lander) into an
independent capability for Europe to access the cislunar Space and the lunar
surface. Institutions can support the infrastructure and stimulate surface
utilisation for industries.
The EU should also seek international collaboration for human spaceflight, with
elements on the critical path of the above solutions preferably operated by Europe, or
at least, developed by European partners to ensure strategic autonomy. They should,
29


30
however, have a level of compatibility with US Artemis and LEO commercialization
initiatives, for safety redundancy, scale effect, and diplomatic reasons. Elements on
the non-critical path may also be proactively open to the global community, including
developing countries. We also propose that the programme leverages the potential
for commercialisation to reduce costs in the different segments and concrete
business cases, which may eventually take on the role of providing commercial Space
stations for Europe and the rest of the world. The potential economic returns of these
endeavours should satisfy long-term global societal development first and foremost,
be fairly distributed among partners (whether EU or non-EU), and preclude the
prevalence of one single player/nation.
A.Moon and Mars Missions as a first step for solar system
exploitation and interstellar migration
The Moon and Mars missions aim to increase our knowledge of these terrestrial
bodies; develop technologies and infrastructure for our long term solar system
exploitation and interstellar migration objectives, exploit their unique resources, and
eventually allow for self-sustaining human settlements. Despite their crucial role, no
European crewed mission has landed on the Moon or on Mars. There is, however, a
timeline to achieve this. According to the ESA website, the current timeline for
Europe’s Mars and Lunar programme is as follows52:
MOON:
●
Orion with European Service Module — 2021
●
Orion landing on the Moon — by 2024
●
Gateway first European experiment — 2022 with the first module
●
Gateway first ESA astronaut — mid 2020s
●
Luna — mid-2020s
●
European Large Logistics lander — by 2028
●
First three European astronauts on the Gateway — second half of 2020s
●
First European astronaut on the Moon before 2030
MARS:
●
ExoMars trace gas orbiter — now
●
ExoMars rover and drill — launching 2022, landing 2023
●
Mars Sample Return:
52 European Space Agency (ESA), European vision of exploration, available at:
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/Exploration/European_visi
on_of_exploration
30


31
🌕First element, NASA Perseverance, rover — currently on Mars
🌕ESA’s Earth Return Orbiter, Sample Fetch Rover and Transfer Arm — by
2026
🌕Landing of first martian samples on Earth — 2031.
As it can be seen, there are no official Mars landings, whereas NASA is leading with
pioneering human exploration projects such as the Artemis programme and the Mars
Direct and Semi-direct concepts.
It is fundamental to pursue further ambitious projects. The Moon’s farside can
mitigate the effects of earthshine and human electromagnetic emissions, allowing for
ambitious astrophysical science. It is also seen as a test-bed for crew training and life
sciences research, which may be complementary to the ISS or analogue missions on
Earth. In addition, lunar material resources can be exploited to produce oxygen and
water for life support and rocket propellants, making it an ideal servicing depot
outside of Earth's gravitational well to sustain our solar system transportation
infrastructure. In addition, He3 is available in larger quantities, which may allow for
advanced fusion energy, which may sustainably solve our near term energy needs.
For our current civilization, Mars is a marvel. Its ideal location and acceptable journey
times, in combination with its future potential habitability make it an ideal objective
for early human expansion through the solar system. The planet is believed to have
had vast ocean systems in its past. It is thought it may have supported simple
lifeforms, and may possibly still do so in certain habitable spots and its subsurface
lakes53. Mars is therefore a unique environment for astrobiological experiments and
the search for extraterrestrial life.
Furthermore, due to its location, Mars is likely to become the main launching and
control point for future asteroid mining and deep Space operations. When it comes to
natural mineral resources, as well as fresh water, the supply of natural resources to be
found in the asteroids could potentially resupply Earth’s dwindling resources through
deep-space mining. The natural jumping off point for such future operations would be
Mars, specifically Mars’ moons Phobos and Deimos. To guarantee Europe an equal
share in the future wealth of the asteroids, we need an adequate infrastructure on
these moons.
Mars will also significantly increase our knowledge of our own planet through
comparative meteorology, hydrology, and planetary evolution and climate history.54
These studies will not only allow for planetary engineering to make Mars habitable
again, but will also serve as a testbed to increase our knowledge of these
technologies for application on other planets and even on Earth to revert
54 Hammond, W. E., 1999, Space Transportation: A systems approach to analysis and Design
53 Water on Mars: discovery of three buried lakes intrigues scientists, nature, available
at:https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-020-02751-1
31


32
environmental destruction and climate change. These terraforming efforts could start
as early as 2045 and be completed within 2 centuries.55Terraforming efforts to make
humanity multi-planetary are also seen as necessary to maintain life as we know it in
the universe by allowing for a “backup” of humanity and Earth’s biosphere in the case
of future extinction events.
In addition, the challenges of Moon and Mars exploration and colonisation will result
in the development of innovative technologies which will foster economic growth in
today’s information era. The first missions will require groundbreaking advancements
in life support and energy and food production in extreme environments. These could
enable us to increase our food production yield in many of today's desertic regions, as
at polar latitudes, deserts and even allow for oceanic cities, especially in less
developed regions.
Space exploration is fundamentally a long-term investment, i.e., the return on
investment from Space exploration is not immediately, but in the future. In other
words, when planning a mission into outer Space, we do not expect to get much
immediate financial gain (beyond the political gain and the P.R. opportunities
attached to a successful Space mission), but we expect the net-gain in the long run to
be more than worth it through eventual exploitation activities and technology
transfer for non-space sectors and applications, both in political, PR, scientific and
financial/economic terms.
The technology developed on the Moon and Mars (as life-support and environmental
control technology) should be able to be applied on Earth to help us better deal with
our terrestrial environmental problems. If we learn how to terraform the Martian
dessert, there is no reason we cannot push back the Sahara as well. And if we learn
how to scrub the excess CO2 from the Martian atmosphere, we can apply the same
technology to fight the greenhouse effect on Earth. This advantage is already in line
with some of the aims formulated by practically all the national and international
(non-commercial) Space agencies, including ESA, as this sort of application of Lunar
and Martian exploration for environmental studies can be considered a natural “next
step” from such activities as geomonitoring. The UAE’s Al-Amal Mars probe, which is in
Mars’ orbit is a good example of this kind of programme: One of its stated aims is to
measure Mars’ atmosphere in order to better understand global weather processes. In
this way, Mars is very much “a sandbox” for geological/aerological and environmental
studies, the end results of which should then be applied back on Earth. Just like GPS
started out as Space technology, but eventually found its way into every smartphone
on Earth, so can Mars and the Moon result in technological innovations that will make
their way back to Earth.
55 Mars: Bringing a Dead World to Life, Life, May 1991, pp. 24-35
32


33
It is therefore key to support the development of ambitious concepts for Moon and
Mars exploration that leverage international collaboration with the European
Union as a key and equal partner. Europe should push for an ambitious
international Mars exploration programme that culminates with the landing and
establishment of a permanent research outpost by 2040.
B. Deep Space Exploration and Interstellar missions
In addition to the inner solar system, it is also fundamental to explore the solar
system’s gas giants and kuiper belt objects. Interior water oceans have been
confirmed in some of Jupiter and Saturn's moons, and are even thought to have been
present in the past of other minor planets, such as Ceres and Pluto. These ocean
worlds raise the possibility of past and recent extraterrestrial life, and their huge
quantities of water and other volatiles such as helium-3 may be key for future solar
system exploitation. It is therefore necessary to support an ambitious agenda which
will culminate with the robotic exploration of the interior oceans of these worlds.
Exploration of the icy gas giants, Uranus and Neptune, is also necessary to support
our long term goals. Up to now, only Voyager 2 has performed a flyby of these
planets, discovering surprising features such as Triton's geysers. Therefore, they
remain relatively unexplored and the chances of major breakthroughs in planetary
science are high. Recent exoplanet surveys have revealed a plethora of similar "icy
worlds," as well as some surprising mini-Neptunes and super Earths.56 This is leading
to many questions about our solar system’s formation, and by studying these planets,
it will be possible to increase our knowledge of the evolution of our solar system and
the habitability of the galaxy. Europe should support flagship missions to study
these icy worlds.
Interstellar missions are also slowly becoming a reality and entering the agendas of
key Space players, such as NASA and the Breakthrough initiative. It is necessary to
support technology development roadmaps to send exploration probes to
proxima centauri and other solar systems, which will one day enable us to visit
new habitable exo-worlds.
C. Future of ISS and Space habitats
With the international Space station (ISS) expected to be discontinued at the end of
the decade, it is necessary to start planning for the future of Space stations. The ISS
has
contributed
to
innovative
discoveries
in
life
science
research
and
for
56 Destination Uranus! Rare chance to reach ice giants excites scientists, Nature, March 2020, available
at: https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-020-00619-y
33


34
manufacturing in Space. It is now known that it's possible to plant in Space, and an
upcoming mission will explore efficient extreme agriculture, which could have
incredible applications to support food production in desert-like Earth regions with
extreme environments and even on Mars.
Future commercialisation of Space station operations will build on the discoveries and
infrastructure of the ISS and allow private industries to exploit its full potential. NASA
and its partners are also planning to develop the Lunar Gateway, which will support
the Artemis mission and deep Space exploration. The European Union should join
these efforts and become an equal partner to guarantee its success and benefit from
its research and applications.
In addition, previous studies have shown the potential applications and feasibility of
large Space stations, such as the O'Neill cylinders57. These could support a growing
human
population,
enable
full
Space
exploration
activities
and
allow
the
manufacturing of necessary Space infrastructure, e.g. for space-based solar power,
astronomical observatories and mining. It is necessary to invest in a technological
demonstration roadmap which can serve as a proof of concept and bring these Space
habitats to reality.
D. Policy Recommendations
R.4.1. We propose to support the development of ambitious concepts for Moon
and Mars exploration, based on international collaboration with the European
Union as a key and equal partner.
R.4.2. Europe shall push for an ambitious international programme of Mars
exploration, to be culminated in the landing and establishment of a
permanent research outpost by 2040.
R.4.3. Europe needs to strive to place European astronauts on the Moon and
Mars.
R.4.4. Europe should bridge the gap between non-space industries (such as
pharmaceuticals,
fluids,
energy,
construction/manufacturing,
telecommunications, and so on) and the Space industry in order to develop
specific modules for large-scale production applications that take advantage
of the unique Space environment. These applications may be divided into
earth-based and space-based: developing sustainable trading in orbit. These
should also enable crewed applications, to be decided on a case-by-case basis
and depending on Member States priorities, which may eventually replace the
57 Johnson, Richard D. and Holbrow, Charles, 1977, Space Settlements: A Design Study, NASA-SP-413,
available at: http://large.stanford.edu/courses/2016/ph240/martelaro2/docs/nasa-sp-413.pdf
34


35
European ISS activities.
R.4.5. Europe should evolve the European Service Module (Orion ESM)58 and the
European Large Logistic Lander (EL3)59 plans into an independent capability
for Europe to access cislunar Space and the lunar surface. Institutions can
support the infrastructure and stimulate the use of surface industries.
R.4.6. Europe should evaluate the leverage of commercialisation potential to
reduce costs in the different segments and concrete business cases that may
eventually take over the role of providing commercial Space stations for
Europe and the rest of the world. The potential economic returns from these
endeavours should primarily serve long-term global societal development and
be distributed fairly among partners (whether EU or non-EU), precluding
domination by any single player/nation.
R.4.7. Europe should seek international collaboration for human space-flight,
especially on non-critical pathway elements that can be proactively opened to
the global Space community.
R.4.8. We call for the guarantee of Europe’s strategic autonomy in crew access to
Space and robotic exploration of the Moon and Mars.
R.4.9. We recommend that Europe increase its research into effective radiation
protection technology and survival in microgravity. One of the main dangers
of any crewed journey outside our atmosphere and geomagnetic field is the
threat of Space radiation on the one hand and bone decalcification and
muscle atrophy on the other. An ideal location for this would be the surface
of the Moon, which is still close to Earth (compared to Mars) but still requires
several technological breakthroughs to become habitable; especially in the
areas of radiation protection and the problem of keeping humans alive and
healthy in an environment with minimal gravity.
R.4.10.
Europe should implement an ambitious agenda for the full
exploration of the solar system’s ocean world, which will culminate in robotic
exploration of the interior oceans.
R.4.11.
Europe should perform a European flagship mission to explore the
exploration of the ice worlds of Uranus and Neptune.
R.4.12.
Europe should plan a technological roadmap for robotic interstellar
missions to Proxima Centauri and other solar systems.
R.4.13.
We propose to support the commercialisation of low Earth orbit
59 European Space Agency (ESA), European Large Logistic Lander, available at:
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/Exploration/European_Lar
ge_Logistics_Lander
58 Airbus, Orion ESM, available at:
https://www.airbus.com/en/products-services/space/exploration/moon/orion-esm
35


36
orbital Space stations.
R.4.14.
Europe should step up efforts in the development, manufacturing
and operation of the upcoming Lunar Gateway.60
R.4.15.
Europe should support research into the manufacturing and
application of future large Space settlements and a technology development
roadmap, including demonstrators.
60 European Space Agency (ESA), Gateway to the Moon, available at:
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/Gateway_to_the_Moon
and Lunar Gateway: Earth’s guard post against asteroids? , available at:
https://www.esa.int/Enabling_Support/Space_Engineering_Technology/Lunar_Gateway_Earth_s_guard
_post_against_asteroids
36


37
VIII.
Providing
public
goods
and
benefits
to
Europe and beyond
Large Space projects, from establishing a GPS network and an Earth observation
system to the creation of large Space habitats, require large upfront investments,
involve many positive externalities and may entail numerous risks that private
companies are not always willing to assume. It is therefore key that governments take
an active role in developing the necessary infrastructure to improve the lives of
citizens by investing in key Space projects, and that these are backed by key political
figures61. In addition, a broad political base is needed, which requires transparent
political support and consideration of major public concerns. Commercialisation can
further contribute to the development of these assets and even play a greater role in
finding new business opportunities by building upon the inertia of government R&D
and its infrastructure, as seen with the recent large increase in venture capital
investment in suborbital travel and Space transportation.
A.Communications
Providing a European-based location and navigation service for citizens and
businesses is essential to improving the quality of life of our citizens on Earth. Thanks
to several services, such as communication and navigation, our satellites enhance the
transmission of data and information so that it can be faster and its impact greater.
A simple example: faster and more wide-ranging transmission of data with broader
signal coverage would enable the unmanned aviation sector to operate more safely. In
concrete terms, this would mean supporting companies leading the efforts to
integrate unmanned aviation into the European Single Sky and assuring the safe
operability of unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) in urban and remote areas, from
monitoring illegal fisheries to transporting vaccines. Volt believes that citizens’
connectivity is crucial to engaging all people in an increasingly interconnected and
globalised world.
Our telecommunications infrastructure should also be sustainable and compatible
with radio astronomy and SETI research. These studies typically use passive strategies
on key frequencies which can cover the full spectrum. Currently, the International
Telecommunication Union is responsible for the allocation of these frequencies, and
as the radio spectrum becomes more crowded with more and more applications, it
becomes increasingly challenging for scientific research to compete with commercial
or military users. It is therefore fundamental to push for a flexible frequency
61 Hammond, W. E., 1999, Space Transportation: A systems approach to analysis and Design
37


38
allocation system by the International Telecommunication Union that guarantees
temporary and permanent observation rights for the studies of these sciences, at
least until an ambitious Space- or Moon-based radio astronomy observatory is
developed.
B. Navigation capabilities
Navigation systems allow us to determine our precise position. The applications are
diverse and range from the downstream use of geolocation services to the precise
determination of the orbit of our Earth satellites. In Europe, the Galileo system is
currently
being
deployed
and
used.
Among
the
concepts
currently
under
consideration is the augmentation of the global navigation satellite system (GNSS)
system with LEO satellites62. These concepts should be supported and explored to
complement our European Galileo system.
Navigation capabilities are not limited to the Earth. The Moon and Mars could also
benefit
from
a
navigation
system,
providing precise positioning and timing
information to our robotic exploration systems and eventually to human settlers. It is
therefore fundamental to push ahead with the implementation of these future
navigation technologies on the Moon and Mars.
C. Earth Observation: Protecting Humanity
To the best of our current knowledge, our planet is the only one in the universe where
life as we know it is possible, despite the groundbreaking scientific discoveries of
thousands of exoplanets orbiting other stars. Since the beginning of the Space age,
we have been able to observe our whole planet at once and to monitor the variation
over time of global phenomena such as climate, desertification and water distribution.
Because our planet is experiencing sudden and continuous changes, it is of paramount
importance to monitor the sustainability of the growth of our population and
economic system.
To achieve such an ambitious goal, Earth observation and climate monitoring with
satellites are needed63. Reliable data, fast monitoring and global coverage are indeed
fundamental requirements for the Earth observing programme, and this can only be
achieved with a large fleet of coordinated satellites. Currently, 26 of the 50 essential
63 J. Yang, P. Gong, R. Fu, M. Zhang, J. Chen, S. Liang, B. Xu, J. Shi, R. Dickinson, 2013, The role of satellite
remote sensing in climate change studies, Nat. Clim. Change 3 (2013) 875–883, available at: doi:
10.1038/nclimate1908.
62 Lei Wang, Zhicheng Lü, Xiaomei Tang, Feixue Wang, LEO-Augmented GNSS Based on Communication
Navigation Integrated Signal, 10.3390/s19214700
38


39
variables for climate change assessment are monitored by satellites64. An example of
what Volt is aspiring to is the European Union's Copernicus Earth observation
programme65,
coordinated
and
managed
by
the
European
Commission
but
implemented in partnership with the Member States, the ESA, the European
Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites (EUMETSAT), the
European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF), EU agencies and
Mercator Océan. Copernicus aims to establish a wide range of Earth observation
capacity by providing accessible information on our planet's environment to
understand and mitigate the effects of climate change and ensure civil security on a
global level. These achievements would guide service providers, public authorities,
and international organisations to improve the quality of life of European citizens and
the whole world, who would also have full, open and free access to this information. In
this way, many new downstream services could be developed for the benefit of all.
As an example, satellite data from the Copernicus programme can be used efficiently
to track national greenhouse gas emissions inventories and other pollutants, to
support monitoring and verification tools and ensure the success of the Paris
Agreement.66 The European Commission is currently developing the technologies and
systems needed, as with the CO2M mission, to have operational space-based
instruments in a satellite constellation by the end of the decade that can track global
emissions and land-use change with high temporal and spatial resolution, and use
data-rich Europe as an excellent calibration tool. This is essential to evaluate the
effectiveness of our strategies within the Energy Transition and Climate Change
Policy, and to guarantee a stricter Emission Trading System compatible with the 1.5°C
maximum global warming target, which requires immediate policy action. We
therefore propose to increase
efforts
to achieve the development of an
observation-based
greenhouse
gas
emissions
monitoring
and
verification
capacity system in a shorter period of time, so that we can efficiently realise our
energy transition goals.
It is indeed for ‘all’ that Volt calls for a stronger EU to be a positive global player that
recognises
what
Copernicus
embodies:
Volt’s
core
values
of
cooperation,
sustainability, solidarity and innovation. Moreover, Volt acknowledges that in the
European Space sector it would be difficult, if not impossible, for a single European
country to develop such a programme independently. Volt believes that only the EU,
with the European Commission playing an essential role, will be able to achieve the
66 European Commission, 2017, CO2 TF-B report: An Operational Anthropogenic Co2 Emissions
Monitoring & Verification Support Capacity, available at:
https://www.copernicus.eu/sites/default/files/2019-09/CO2_Red_Report_2017.pdf
65 Copernicus, Europe’s exe on Earth, available at: https://www.copernicus.eu/en
64 CEOS, ESA, 2015, Satellite Earth Observations in Support of Climate Information Challenges, available
at: http://eohandbook.com/cop21/files/CEOS_EOHB_2015_COP21.pdf
39


40
vision, funding, and technology required to develop the most ambitious Earth
observation programme ever.
D. Start-ups and increasing accessibility to European Space
information from the Copernicus programme
There is also a need to increase the dissemination of Space technologies to develop a
larger set of applications for our citizens. Recently, numerous Space start-ups have
been emerging with the support of venture capital and numerous business incubators.
We believe it is important to further develop more business incubators in Europe and
to also align them with our long-term technological roadmaps for Space exploration
and exploitation.
For example, in the context of Earth Observation downstream SSME and use of
Copernicus data, it might not be sufficient to provide only raw data to the market, but
also to develop key applications and platforms with public agencies to foster the
dissemination of knowledge and know-how and to create incentives for the
emergence of an efficient commercial sector. In addition, a strong reference to
privacy and data protection is missing. Considering the EU’s efforts to protect
privacy and the fact that Earth observation and surveillance might pose a threat to it
as technology advances and commercial applications in the downstream sector
evolve, it would be useful to show our interests in citizens’ data and privacy clearly.
E. Space, public health and pandemics
Following the Covid-19 pandemic of 2020, the global community realised that
infectious diseases have been spreading across the planet since the beginning, just as
the human population. The difference between now and the past is that we are
strongly interconnected, a phenomenon that will only increase as transportation
technology innovates and evolves. While the interconnectedness of a global
ecosystem helps infectious diseases spread at a high pace, it has also led humanity to
great achievements in various fields of scientific and cultural innovation, as well as
closer international cooperation.
In fact, thanks to international cooperation, the collection and distribution of data is
increasing, and it is becoming more available through satellite technologies and
high-quality coverage systems, such as the Geographical Information System (GIS) and
Earth Observation (EO).
A major European effort in gathering this data collected from Space would help
40


41
European scientists to develop more precise models to:67
●
Analyse and track the risk of disease outbreaks;
●
Monitor environmental factors such as air quality or human-animal or
human-human interaction;
●
Monitor the spread of infectious diseases geographically and quantitatively;
●
Monitor the production and distribution of vaccines globally (via GIS).
With these tools, the European Union could take the lead in assessing the public
health impact of diseases on its citizens and the rest of the world.
Volt believes that the EU can play an important role in monitoring the supply chain
networks to counter the impact of diseases at any stage and any level of risk. To do so,
the EU should invest in satellite technologies that help identify safe and viable
transportation routes, as well as in unmanned aviation as a tool for delivering
essential medical and subsistence supplies to hard-to-reach areas.
Volt’s Space Policy promotes the use of electric, ergo zero-emission, automated
transportation, unmanned aircraft systems and telemedicine as tools that enable
immediate, rapid response. guaranteed by the reliability of Space technologies in a
safe and predictive way.68 Efficient use of these tools must be made through the use
of the global navigation satellite system (GNSS), supported by LEO satellite
constellations, and through the European Union’s commitment to high coverage for
communication networks using 5G.
These tools will enable healthcare providers in the EU to provide diagnosis and
treatments with more accurate and timely information while providing healthcare
services to as many patients as possible and mitigating the spread of infectious
diseases or the deterioration of critical medical situations.
In summary, Volt is a proponent of Space as one of the main tools to achieve greater
public health security and current and future pandemics. Warning systems linking
Space data to public health facilities are needed to monitor and prevent future
pandemics. According to Volt, these achievements should not be limited to the
European Union, but should benefit the whole world in order to create beneficial and
sustainable international cooperation.
68 See the European Regulation (EU) 2019/947 and Regulation (EU) 2019/945) on UAS, available at:
https://www.easa.europa.eu/regulations#regulations-uas---unmanned-aircraft-systems
67 ISU, 2020, The role of space during pandemics, ISU Team Project report
41


42
F. Technology transfer, innovation and economic benefits
Volt believes in the positive spillover effect that Space has on the global and
European economies. In terms of commercial spaceflight opportunities, spaceflight
offers a new opportunity to spur socio-economic growth through the development of
dedicated technological districts, new employment opportunities, specific educational
programmes, and side business opportunities (e.g. edutainment, marketing and
sponsorship, research spinoffs). Space has a major impact on the labour market in
particular. Due to technological innovation trends in robotic applications for industrial
purposes, many jobs would be at high risk of automation or could change significantly.
Volt aims to lead the discussion on the future of aerospace jobs with industry and
Member States to foster an organic labour market and the development of industrial
innovation.
In this context, Volt supports technological spin-off opportunities. Many of the
technological innovations developed for Space exploration can be found in everyday
applications and specific R&D programmes for consumer goods. Supporting spin-off
applications for Space technologies would foster the creation of new private-sector
innovative start-ups and create new business ecosystems.
Information and capabilities derived from Space offer significant potential as a driver
for new business. The aim of the Volt Space Policy is to encourage EU activities that
provide sustainable space-based services and applications for new user communities
and customers through interaction with innovative digital technologies such as IoT,
machine learning, Big Data, autonomous driving, etc. The application of space-derived
solutions would benefit and enhance the technological development of trending
areas such as cyber security, smart cities, precision agriculture and fishing and climate
change monitoring.
G. Fostering
European
Space
commercialisation
while
leveraging on governmental involvement
The Space industry is becoming increasingly commercial as private sector revenues
grow exponentially and non-European entrepreneurs bring in venture capital. This
leads to a highly competitive global scenario and poses a challenge to the security of
supply in the European Union.
This increase in Space commercialisation could bring enormous benefits by shifting
spending towards optimal development in a competitive world, increasing Space
cooperation in the international market and even enhancing global efforts to explore
Space to Mars and beyond. Nevertheless, history shows that the involvement of the
government is fundamental in the establishment of key infrastructures that enable
42


43
exploitation of new territories for human involvement.
For this reason, we suggest that commercialisation/privatisation should be used as
a means to use the market economy to achieve specific targets, rather than as an
end
in
itself.
An
efficient
trade-off
should
be
pursued where European
governments actively contribute to Space applications with high costs and risky
infrastructure and technology development, uncertain demand and long pay-back
periods, such as in Space transportation (new reusable crewed vehicles, Space lifts),
Space exploration and Moon/Mars exploration missions and habitat construction, and
in designing efficient regulations to foster private sector participation and contribute
to optimal infrastructure development.
In addition, the exploratory nature of Space activities should be highlighted and
the “estimated return” should not be the only rationale when proposing
government involvement in new Space assets. Scientific and technological research
and development should remain an important justification for Space investment. We
should keep in mind that our civilisation is currently in an early exploratory phase
within the five-phased evolutionary programme, preparing for eventual colonisation,
resource exploitation and planetary engineering in the solar system. Our Space
programmes should therefore be adapted accordingly. This is not only to go beyond
Space, but also to provide us with the necessary capabilities to monitor and design our
own planet and prevent catastrophic climate change and environmental destruction.
H.Policy Recommendations
R.5.1. The exploratory nature of Space activities should be highlighted, and the
“estimated return” should not be the only rationale when proposing
government involvement in new Space assets.
R.5.2. Europe should push for the International Telecommunication Union to
guarantee temporary and permanent allocations for radio astronomy and
SETI research.
R.5.3. Member States should promote European concepts for lunar and Martian
navigation systems to support our exploration missions.
R.5.4. The augmentation of our European GNSS system by LEO satellites should
be further explored.
R.5.5. We support the European Union’s efforts in Earth observation and the
Copernicus programme. The EU should take the lead in monitoring the
atmosphere, oceans and environmental issues.
R.5.6. We should intensify our efforts to develop an observation-based GHG
monitoring and verification capacity system in a shorter period of time to
43


44
efficiently accomplish our energy transition goals.
R.5.7. Europe should increase the number of European Space incubators and
projects.
R.5.8. Europe should incentivise the use of Copernicus data by developing key
applications and supporting their dissemination to the public sector.
R.5.9. We recommend commercialisation/privatisation as a means to use the
market economy to achieve specific targets, but not as an end in itself. In
doing so, always consider how to contribute to reducing costs in key areas of
Space transportation and to achieving  our exploration goals.
R.5.10.
Member States should organise outreach campaigns involving
non-space industries and companies to provide training and knowledge on
potential
benefits
of
Earth
observation
and
infrastructure,
Space
manufacturing, intercontinental travel, etc. to encourage participation and
investment.
R.5.11.
Use of Space technologies should be expanded to achieve greater
public health safety in terms of public health and current and future
pandemics. Warning systems linking Space data to public health institutions
are needed to monitor and prevent future pandemics. According to Volt, such
achievements should not be confined to the European Union, but should
serve the whole world to create beneficial and sustainable international
cooperation.
R.5.12.
Member
States
should
facilitate
European
competition with
exploration goals and rewarding milestones based on perceived risks to
guarantee short-term payoff. This will enhance the development of key
technologies and their spillover effects by attracting venture capital.
R.5.13.
Member States shall promote an efficient balance between public
and private involvement in Space activities, e.g. with active competition in
Space transportation, while guaranteeing a market by the government based
on European autonomy and security. A prevention of perpetual monopolistic
charters in all areas is needed.
R.5.14.
Member States should create government programmes to develop
Space infrastructure and technology with active involvement of the private
sector and hand in its use and operation, to foster commercialisation while
guaranteeing  social benefits.
R.5.15.
The focus should be on highlighting the explorative nature of Space
activities when deciding on the development of new types of Space assets,
and not only the exploitation/or short term profitability of investments.
R.5.16.
Europe must push ahead with the promotion of international
44


45
commercialisation partnerships to enhance cooperation with other nations in
Space. The private sector should assume its responsibility as an international
actor.
45


46
IX.
European and planetary defence
A.European defence: Preserving the integrity of European
Space infrastructure, integration and orbital access
Space assets are part of national and European critical infrastructure today. Satellites
provide decision makers with secure communications; they provide imagery for critical
decisions, from intelligence needs to monitoring agriculture and economic structures;
they serve us all for positioning, navigation and timing. In the future, they will also
serve as critical data relays for citizens, and the analysis derived from their signals and
imagery will be embedded in a wide range of societal applications. In parallel,
commercial players are populating Space with new business cases around the Internet
and Internet-of-Things from the sky. All this makes Space infrastructure, as well as the
optimal orbital locations of this infrastructure, a strategic matter.
Despite international agreements and public speeches about the peaceful use of
Outer Space, the US, Russia and China have long recognised this strategic value and
developed capabilities to undermine their geopolitical opponents. This is not only
about surveillance and support of ground-based military assets or sending weapons
over Space and identifying them from Space, but now also threatening satellites.
The first apparent sign of this affecting Europe came in 2017, when a Russian satellite
came dangerously close to a French intelligence satellite. Europe should have no
interest in encouraging such behaviour, and it has no power to stop the United
States, Russia, or China from engaging in such behaviour.
However, Europe must
ensure that its critical Space infrastructure and strategic orbital positions remain
secure, now and in the long term.
As a result, Europe should develop sufficient capabilities to detect threats, whether
from Space or from the ground. This would require a combination of optical and
radar instruments as well as a powerful analysis and management infrastructure that
could be deployed from Space if necessary.
B. Peaceful uses of Outer Space
We believe in the continued peaceful use of Space for scientific and economic
activities in accordance with Space law. While bodies brought into Space can
contribute to strengthening the defence of European citizens and the European Union
both inside and outside the EU borders, all developments should be in accordance
with the Outer Space Treaty and the Space Preservation Treaty.69 Space, the Moon
and other celestial bodies should remain free of weapons of mass destruction,
69 United Nations, United Nations Treaties and Principles on Outer Space, available at:
http://www.unoosa.org/pdf/publications/STSPACE11E.pdf
46


47
weapons testing of any kind and the establishment of military bases.
Recently, our transatlantic ally, the USA, opened a new debate in Space when they
announced the establishment of a “Space Force”. This sheds light on the recent trend
towards the militarisation of Space, which could lead to a new arms race.70 Weapons in
Space are not completely banned under the Outer Space Treaty (OST) of 1967, which
only regulates the use of nuclear weapons in Space.71
The militarisation of Space goes against our core values of a sustainable and
prosperous Space industry and human expansion into the solar system. Regardless of
the enormous number of casualties and environmental damage that a space-based
weapon could cause on Earth, as well as the enormous cost and waste of resources for
such a defence system, any potential use of weapons against a satellite could result in
an enormous amount of Space debris, endangering the entire Space industry and its
derivatives, as stated in the point on Space debris. We will therefore urge the EU and
the UN to approve Space demilitarisation treaties such as the Preventing an Arms
Race in Outer Space (PAROS)72 and the Space Preservation Treaty.
A strategy to further secure our orbital assets should also ensure sustainable Space
traffic management and acknowledge the risks of Space debris that any Space
weapon tests or military campaign could generate in our near-Earth Space
environment. The EU should therefore ban all weapons tests or the use of weapons
that could create Space debris and condemn foreign nations that do so, taking
necessary action under trade agreements and other international mechanisms.
It should also be noted that the use of Space weapons for military purposes must be
kept separate from the use of Space weapons for research purposes. Some advanced
propulsion concepts, such as pulsed nuclear fission or fusion propulsion, currently
have an unclear legal status. The Orion project, which could have used our current
nuclear arsenal for exploration purposes, was cancelled due to problems with the
OST. These technologies could also have very real practical implications for the
development of asteroid deflection concepts. These restrictions should be relaxed to
allow the development of advanced technologies for our exploratory goals.
72 NTI, PAROS Treaty, available at:
https://www.nti.org/education-center/treaties-and-regimes/proposed-prevention-arms-race-space-par
os-treaty/
71 Federation of American Scientists, Prevention of an Arms Race in Outer Space, available at:
https://programs.fas.org/ssp/nukes/ArmsControl_NEW/nonproliferation/NFZ/NP-NFZ-PAROS.html
70 Reaching Critical Will, Outer Space - Militarization, weaponization, and the prevention of an arms
race, available at:
https://www.reachingcriticalwill.org/resources/fact-sheets/critical-issues/5448-outer-space
47


48
C. Planetary Defence
Technologies for asteroid detection and deflection will also be developed. These are
currently in their infancy and we still do not yet have an effective warning system.
Recently, an asteroid was detected just 24 hours before its flyby of Earth. Had this
asteroid impacted over a city, it would have caused massive devastation, as it was
predicted that it could have as much energy as the Tsar Bomb, similar to the Tunguska
event in 1908, which flattened 2000 km2 of the Siberian forest. In regards to
Tunguska, it has been hypothesised that this later impact could have been caused by
an iron-based asteroid grazing the Earth, which, if it had impacted, would have created
a near extinction73. It is necessary to get serious about planetary defence and push for
an active asteroid defence system. An asteroid impact could be the first extinction
event that humans actively avoid.
D. Policy Recommendations
R.6.1. The EU should enhance its SSA and C4ISR capabilities to protect the EU's
critical infrastructures in Space and on Earth.
R.6.2. The EU should develop and deploy common Space defence systems to
achieve a key milestone towards the establishment of a Common Security and
Defence Policy that fosters internal military cooperation and enables a
stronger Union on the global stage.
R.6.3. The EU should strongly oppose the weaponization of Space, support the
adoption of international treaties in favour of demilitarisation of Space and
sanction foreign nations that take the opposite path.
R.6.4. Push for a reassessment of the OST to allow for the use of nuclear
technologies in Space for peaceful advanced propulsion concepts and for
asteroid defence systems.
R.6.5. We call for the implementation of
a European concept for an active
asteroid defence system and push for a global agreement on international
efforts to establish an effective warning network and deflection strategy.
73 Daniil E Khrennikov, Andrei K Titov, Alexander E Ershov, Vladimir I Pariev, Sergei V Karpov, 2020, On
the possibility of through passage of asteroid bodies across the Earth’s atmosphere, Monthly Notices
of the Royal Astronomical Society, Volume 493, Issue 1, March 2020, Pages 1344–1351, available at:
https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/staa329
48


49
X.
Advanced Space Exploitation
To date, humanity is exploiting a tiny, negligible fraction of what Space has to provide.
The colonisation of the entire solar system will not only provide us with more
resources to enhance our quality of life, reduce inequality and fight climate change,
but the expansion of human settlements will also provide the basis for the
development of new technologies, improved social structures and infinite possibilities
for the social and moral development of humanity. These latter aspects will utilise the
current “information era” to an unimaginable extent.
This chapter addresses the benefits of Space resources and advanced exploitation of
the solar system and how we can get there.
A.Space Mining and In-Situ Resource Utilisation (ISRU)
Space mining could not only increase exponentially our exploration capabilities by
utilising Space resources outside of our Earth's gravitational well74, but its universal
presence within the inner solar system and in the outer regions could also allow us to
retrieve vast quantities of rare earths such as platinum, which are essential to
achieving our energy and ecological transition goals, while ensuring sustainable
resource extraction with a low carbon and ecological footprint.75 The development of
the necessary
technologies,
the
creation
of
new
European companies to
demonstrate the technologies and exploit these resources through public-private
partnerships, and the development of a legal framework to ensure commercial
exploitation under the Outer Space Treaty must be encouraged.
Given the benefits that Space mining could bring to Space exploration and the energy
transition, we propose to take a progressive and egalitarian perspective on the
ownership and use of Space resources. Therefore, Space mining for sustainable
exploration and use of the Earth could not be considered a national appropriation and
the safe zones described in the Artemis Accords could be an excellent approach to
perform the described operations in accordance with the OST. These Accords can be
signed by the European Union and we can set up a working group to develop an
international regime for the utilisation and exploitation of Space resources within
the framework of the United Nations.76 In addition, a mechanism should be created
76 Many initiatives are investigating this concept. For example The Hague International Space Resources
Governance or the 2019 COPUOS proposal made by Belgium and Greece.
75 Andreas Makoto Hein, Michael Saidani, Hortense Tollu, 2018, Exploring Potential Environmental
Benefits of Asteroid Mining, 69th International Astronautical Congress 2018, Oct 2018, Bremen,
Germany, available at: https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01910090/document
74 Amara Graps + 30 Co-authors, In-Space Utilisation of Asteroids: Answers to Questions from the
Asteroid Miners, ASIME 2016 White Paper
49


50
to ensure fair redistribution of resources while providing incentives for developing
technology and the implementation of mining activities. This could guarantee that
lower-income and less developed countries benefit from Space mining. In addition, in
the context of commercialisation, mechanisms should be in place to ensure fair
competition among a variety of actors while preventing long-lasting monopolies or
property rights.
Space mining could be a breakthrough in Space exploration, as In-Situ Resource
Utilisation (ISRU)77 would allow, for example, water and fuel to be extracted and
spacecraft and planetary components to be built directly outside the Earth's
gravitational pull, significantly reducing launch costs and promoting humanity's
expansion in the solar system. This is the key to a future human presence on the
Moon. Asteroids also pose a significant threat78 to our world. By developing these
technologies, we would also enhance our planetary defences by increasing our
knowledge of their internal structure and composition, which would allow us to plan
missions to avoid any possible disastrous collision. Furthermore, building a robust
commercial Space mining industry would improve our economy by bringing back huge
amounts of rare earth elements such as platinum. A single asteroid could be worth
billions.79
Asteroid mining could also be more sustainable by reducing the environmental impact
associated with using Earth materials for Space missions, as the ISRU would be able to
produce these components directly in Space. Additionally, mining rare earths in Space
and bringing them back for terrestrial use, such as platinum for green technologies
that aid environmental transition, could have a smaller carbon footprint, increase
availability and be more profitable than mining directly on Earth.80
There are also many companies with advanced plans, such as Planetary Resources,
Deep Space Industries, Orbital Sciences Corporation, Ispace and Bigelow Aerospace,
many of which have already launched some demonstrator missions. A recent study by
the Keck Institute study mentioned that by 2025 we could have the technology to
80 Andreas Makoto Hein, Michael Saidani, Hortense Tollu, 2018, Exploring Potential Environmental
Benefits of Asteroid Mining, 69th International Astronautical Congress 2018, Oct 2018, Bremen,
Germany, available at: https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01910090/document
79 Business Insider, 2017, Goldman Sachs: space-mining for platinum is ‘more realistic than perceived’,
available at:
https://www.businessinsider.nl/goldman-sachs-space-mining-asteroid-platinum-2017-4/?international=t
rue&r=US
78 Masterson, A., 2019, Space agency ups risk of asteroid-Earth collision, available at:
https://cosmosmagazine.com/space/space-agency-ups-risk-of-asteroid-earth-collision/
77 Amara Graps + 30 Co-authors, In-Space Utilisation of Asteroids: Answers to Questions from the
Asteroid Miners, ASIME 2016 White Paper
50


51
retrieve a 500t asteroid81 and that commercial asteroid mining could begin in 2040.82
Furthermore, some countries, such as the US, Luxembourg and the UAE have already
introduced favourable legislation that is inspiring and attracting new businesses.
Despite all the potential benefits and regulatory pressure, there are some concerns
with the 1967 Outer Space Treaty that could prevent commercial companies from
mining asteroid resources, and although there is consensus among experts that it
could be possible with its current formulation and with concrete “loopholes,”83 it
highlights the importance of reforming and updating this treaty. In the absence of a
clear international treaty, the European Union should also use trade agreements
with third countries to provide certainty to commercial Space companies with
granted exploitation patents and permissions. These could be based on preliminary
surveys and speculative values, which would also allow for partially financing these
operations.
We will encourage companies and start-ups to develop and launch missions to the
Moon, asteroids and other smaller bodies in the Solar System to demonstrate
critical technologies such as In-Situ Resource Utilisation (ISRU) and asteroid
capture. It will do so by proposing related missions to ESA, by setting up European
competitions with financial rewards, similar to the Google Lunar X Prize,84 and by
funding
grants,
purchasing
equity
and
reimbursing
costs
for
research
and
development. We will also work towards favourable legislation in all EU Member
States, as has already been done in Luxembourg85 and the US, and work towards
bilateral agreements with other countries. The aim is not only to bring certainty to
future asteroid mining companies and ensure that Space resources are subject to the
“common property right”, but also to regulate the sector to ensure high safety
standards. We will also support the establishment of an international adjudicative
body within the UN, such as is being done with the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).
B. Space exploration to solve energy and material needs
Global energy demand is projected to increase by orders of magnitude in the next few
85 CNBC, 2018, Luxembourg leads the trillion-dollar race to become the Silicon Valley of asteroid
mining, available at:
https://www.cnbc.com/2018/04/16/luxembourg-vies-to-become-the-silicon-valley-of-asteroid-mining.ht
ml
84 X PRIZE, The New Space Race, available at: https://lunar.xprize.org/prizes/google-lunar
83Andreas Makoto Hein, Michael Saidani, Hortense Tollu, 2018, Exploring Potential Environmental
Benefits of Asteroid Mining, 69th International Astronautical Congress 2018, Oct 2018, Bremen,
Germany, available at: https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01910090/document
82 International Space University, 2010, ASTRA: Asteroid mining, Technologies Roadmap and
Applications
81 Keck, Institute of Space Studies. Asteroid Retrieval Feasibility Study
51


52
decades. Although classical terrestrial renewable energies are an excellent source,
their scalability might not be sufficient in the next centuries. Moreover, fossil fuels
will eventually be depleted, and considering that we are constrained to consuming
only 7 years of actual GHG emissions, they may soon be an unacceptable energy
source. Nuclear fission technology poses other issues, and its fuel will eventually
become scarce. Advanced breeding technologies may be able to extend the lifetime
of these resources, but in the long term, we will run out of radioactive material and
need other sources to support renewable energy.
1. Space Based Solar Power (SBSP)
Space Based Solar Power (SBSP) is one of these options, and one of the most
promising, but still largely unexplored. The International Academy of Astronautics
concluded in 2011 that SBSP is already feasible and could be realised in just 10 to 15
years.86 Almost a decade has passed since, but efforts have been minimal.
Three factors force us to consider the SBSP: the growing world population, increasing
per capita energy consumption, and the need to fight climate change.
Generating solar energy in Earth orbit, where sunlight is available more than 99,8% of
the time, could be the most promising way to simultaneously address climate change
and the increasing global energy demand. Indeed, the Earth receives only one part in
2.3 billion of the Sun’s output, making SBSP by far the largest potential energy source
available. Solar arrays in Earth’s orbit could collect almost 10 times the energy of the
same solar arrays installed on the ground. It can also guarantee global supply to
hard-to-reach regions and low-income countries, which increases their capacity for
democratisation and contributes directly to the sustainable development goals. At
present, only the United States, China, and Japan are active in this field. The European
Union must not be left behind. The EU has to invest in this promising technology and
foster its research and development. Further, close partnerships with the private
sector can be mutually beneficial to reduce costs.
2. Advanced fusion fuels
As humankind expands further into Space, we need to take advantage of the
abundant resources. There is the possibility of using advanced fusion fuels such as
He-3 for nuclear fusion. Although terrestrial reserves may eventually be depleted,
He-3 is available along with other energy sources for extraction on the Moon and in
almost infinite proportions in the outer solar system,87 as in the Jovian moons,
underlining the need for Space exploration.
87 Palaszewski, Bryan, Atmospheric Mining in the Outer Solar System, National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, 2005
86 John C. Mankins, 2011, Space Solar Power, International Academy of Astronautics.
52


53
The first fusion reactors may be designed to use the hydrogen isotopes deuterium
and tritium as fuel, because achieving net energy production would be easiest to
achieve with these fuels. The drawback is that this reaction produces neutrons which
damage the reactor wall over time. Next generation fusion fuels such as He-3
promise to improve the state of art on this issue, as these reactions (known as
aneutronic fusion) do not produce neutrons.88 The only difficulty is that the reaction
rate
is lower and higher temperatures are required. But with advances in
superconductor technology, these conditions may well be met. Furthermore, the ionic
fusion products could be captured in an electric field and their kinetic energy could be
converted directly into electric power. This achieves higher conversion efficiencies
than traditional Carnot processes.89
With this technology, it will not only be possible to further break through our current
energy limitations on Earth and ensure a sustainable environment, but it will also
provide infinite opportunities for Space exploration with advanced fusion propulsion
concepts. Interstellar migration will finally be possible.
C. Policy Recommendations
R.7.1. The EU should incentivise the development of technologies required for
Space mining and asteroid capturing for economic and planetary defence
purposes.
R.7.2. The EU should establish a working group to develop an international
regime for the use and exploitation of Space resources within the framework
of the United Nations.90
R.7.3. In the absence of a clear international treaty, the European Union should
use trade agreements with third countries to provide certainty for Space
commercial companies with granted exploitation patents and permissions.
R.7.4. Member States should encourage companies and start-ups to develop and
launch missions to the Moon, asteroids and other smaller bodies in the solar
system to demonstrate critical technologies such as In-Situ Resource
Utilisation (ISRU) and asteroid capture.
R.7.5. The EU should harmonise the legal framework for ISRU among its Member
States and advocate for the establishment of an international adjudicative
body within the UN to maintain the register for patents and permissions.
90 Many initiatives are investigating this concept. For example The Hague International Space Resources
Governance or the 2019 COPUOS proposal made by Belgium and Greece.
89 Wikipedia, Direct energy conversion,  available at: Direct energy conversion
88 Freidberg, 2007, Plasma Physics and Fusion Energy, p. 27, Cambridge University Press
53


54
R.7.6. The EU should promote Space Based Solar Power (SBSP) and the creation
of a European technology roadmap with targeted investments in the
establishment of European start-ups in the field of Space energy.
R.7.7. The EU should push the development of nuclear fusion, especially using
He-3 concepts, as it is available in large quantities in Space and will allow us to
fully explore the solar system through advanced fusion propulsion concepts.
54


55
XI.
Governance and Space institutions in the
European and international context
European Space agencies need to be further integrated to improve efficiency,
cooperation and synergies. Furthermore, it is also necessary to address the low level
of investment in European Space activities compared to the international context,91
which may reduce the benefits of the Space economy, some of which have been
addressed in previous chapters. The Member States' combined military expenditure
amounted to EUR 223.4 billion in 2018, equivalent to approximately 1.4% of the
European Union's GDP.92 If the EU spent 0.14% of EU GDP (EUR 22.34 billion) a year on
the Space programme, we would be able to provide funding and achieve larger
exploratory results. NASA’s 2020 official budget is around 22 billion USD93, which is
approximately four times the ESA budget.94 One of our key proposals is to link at least
1/10 of the funding for Space programmes and Space organisations to defence
expenses.
Many of the issues addressed, such as the militarisation of Space, Space debris and
traffic management, or human exploration of Mars and the Moon, fall within the
scope of international Space cooperation and international law. In the interest of
efficient policy application, the strategy should therefore distinguish between what it
can achieve through European collaboration and its institutions and what it can
pursue in the international context.
A.European Space institutions
The European Union hosts the largest number of Space agencies in the world. On the
one hand, there is the European Space Agency (ESA), an intergovernmental entity in
which not all Member States participate, and in which not only Member States
participate. For example, Canada, Switzerland and Norway are participating in the
ESA. Furthermore, the European Union recently announced the European Union
Agency for the Space programme (EUSPA), which will create synergies between the
various EU Space components. On the other hand, many Member States have their
own Space agencies or comparable institutions, such as the German Aerospace Center
(DLR) for Germany and the Centre Nationale d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES) for France.
94 European Space Agency (ESA), 6.49 Billion Euro in 2020, Funding, available at:
https://www.esa.int/About_Us/Corporate_news/Funding
93 The Planetary Society, NASA's FY 2020 Budget, available at:
https://www.planetary.org/space-policy/nasas-fy-2020-budget#:~:text=NASA's%20budget%20in%20fi
scal%20year,of%20all%20U.S.%20government%20spending
92 European Defence Agency, DEFENCE DATA, 2017-2018: Key findings and analysis
91 According to EuroConsult, the EU contributes to 9% of global investment in space exploration. Larrea
Brito, N., Clarence Dee, J. and Seminari, S., Global Prospect for Space Exploration: A Strategic and
Economic Assessment, IAC - The CyberSpace Edition, 12-14 October 2020. IAC-20,A3,1,4x57292
55


56
B. European
Space
Agency
or
Space
Agency
of
the
European Union?
ESA represents a successful model for integration and synergy inside and outside the
EU. The agency provides the EU with a gateway to Space and is currently working with
the EU to implement the Copernicus and Galileo programmes. Nevertheless, it should
be noted that ESA is an intergovernmental entity outside the European Union and
therefore subject to a different regulatory framework. It is funded by its members
and, to a lesser extent, directly by the European Union. This decoupled approach has
several advantages and disadvantages, which are explained in more detail below:
Advantages of a decoupled ESA/EU
Disadvantages of a decoupled ESA/EU
●
Decoupled from European
politics. A government Space
agency like NASA may be more
exposed to electoral cycles, which
could affect the effectiveness of
Space missions which typically
require more than ten years from
conception to execution.
●
It may be easier to involve
external EU countries, although
this could also be implemented in
an EU-based agency (e.g. Norway’s
participation in the European
Economic Area).
●
Low Political Integration. It is
difficult to link European political
objectives and roadmaps with
Space aspects.
●
Geo-returns are linked.
Geo-return policy becomes easier
to implement because members
contribute directly, whereas the
European Union’s share will
depend on European policy
decisions. This would bring the
disadvantages of a geo-return
aspect with lower industrial
efficiency and regional biases.
Nevertheless, the geo-return
policy might also be attractive.
●
Lower EU legacy. It might be
more difficult to highlight the
successes of the EU and the
benefits of EU integration.
●
Less subject to EU oversight.
With European political oversight,
it is possible to include more
comprehensive transparency and
accountability regulations.
1. Push for a European Union led Space Agency
We recognise the need for the European Union to have its own Space agency. Indeed,
in such a strategic sector, it is essential that the EU can act as a single voice through an
56


57
institutionalised body to effectively represent our strategic interests.
We therefore advocate that what is done today by ESA and EUSPA can be done in
the future by a fully European Union-led Space Agency - whether this is achieved by
transforming ESA into an EU agency, by dissolving and re-founding it on paper only, or
by transferring its responsibilities and tasks to a new, ad hoc created EU agency. This
will ensure that ongoing scientific programmes are not interrupted and that ESA's
bureaucratic structures are changed as little as possible. The states that are members
of ESA but not of the EU (Norway, Canada, Switzerland, United Kingdom) are
guaranteed a special partnership agreement that continues their current membership
of ESA.
This will ensure that the Union has full control over its Space policy, while at the same
time ensuring greater efficiency and better use of economic resources by bringing
together the current EU institutions dealing with Space into a single body at a later
stage.
At the same time, we believe that all geographical levels of the Union (not only
EU-wide, but also local and national) should play a role in accordance with the
principles of subsidiarity and distributed leadership. We support local space-related
companies, initiatives and scientific activities.
C. Geo-return policy
To keep up in "New Space," Europe needs more cross-border cooperation, more
speed, and more courage.
ESA was successful in the old world, where Space funding was provided by
governments, resulting in a stable foundation for European (and global) Space
activities.95 The money for the Space industry was secure and did not encourage
risk-taking in the development of new Space technologies. Consequently, the Space
landscape has not changed significantly in the last 30 years.
The geographical return, or “Geo-return,” policy is a fundamental pillar of ESA’s
structure. At the heart of this concept is the desire of European nations to
develop their high-tech sectors and engage in Space activities. In other words, ESA
member states pay a membership fee to ESA and get equivalently valued
high-tech
Space
contracts
back
for
their
industry
under
the
Geo-return
agreement. This is the main incentive for smaller European countries to be members
of ESA, as they are not able to compete for Space contracts on a competitive basis.
95 Clemens Rumpf, 2015, Increased competition will challenge ESA’s space authority, The Space Review,
February 2, 2015, available at: https://www.thespacereview.com/article/2687/1
57


58
This policy is not aimed at increasing efficiency, but has other goals, such as the
development of high-tech sectors in member nations.
This approach succeeded in preserving the status quo. Today, however, we are
entering an era in which efficiency is the most important factor in Space contracting,
as private investment accounts for an increasingly large share of the Space industry.
For the Ariane 6 launcher, ESA has scrapped its fundamental principle of Geo-return in
order to compete with SpaceX cost standards. The significance of this step cannot be
overstated.
Unlike ESA, this dilemma does not exist a priori with the EU, as EU contracts are
awarded on a more competitive basis. Therefore, the EU has good reasons to
strengthen its authority in European Space, as its infrastructure is already set up for a
competitive market.
Nonetheless, there are other areas where commercial considerations are not
decisive. Science and exploration missions as well as human spaceflight are
examples of such areas. These areas have a good chance of experiencing a
continuation of ESA principles because they strengthen Europe as a whole.
Based on several factors (including increasing internal competitiveness, maintaining
fairness and political stability), we recommend moving forward with the progressive
revision
of
the
current
Industrial
Return
Coefficient
to
increase
market
competitiveness and foster innovation. In this way, stronger innovation would emerge
in all sub-sectors where commercial considerations are decisive. Political stability
should be maintained by allowing Member States' industries the time they need to
adjust to change through staggered reform.
D. Role of an International Space Agency (ISA)
We also want to call for the establishment of an International Space Agency (ISA)
to enhance international collaboration and technology transfer. This would enable
humanity to pursue goals of common interest in the exploration of Space exploration
and the advanced exploitation of the solar system. This could be established within
the United Nations or as an independent entity within the United Nations Office for
Outer Space Affairs serving as a bridge. The agency could be responsible for
promoting ambitious international Space missions and infrastructure, such as the
development of future Space access systems like Space planes and Space lifts, the
construction of Space habitats and space-based solar power satellites, and the
coordination of an international human Space flight mission to Mars and its eventual
colonisation. In addition, it may be crucial to advance sustainable development goals
58


59
and enable the democratisation of Space by supporting current non-spacefaring
nations and providing them with the necessary technologies and capabilities to
ensure that no one is left behind in the race for new Space.
Increased international cooperation for such advanced projects would be an excellent
symbol of world peace and cooperation that could enhance parallel efforts to combat
climate change. It should be emphasised that the pursuit of such common interests
for the benefit of all is difficult to achieve with national Space agencies with national
interests. Apollo was primarily motivated by political competition rather than a desire
to gain a competitive advantage in lunar exploration, which is comparable to US
Artemis rhetoric about American Boots on the Moon with American rockets.
Furthermore, the agency could:
●
simplify project management of international programmes;
●
contribute to the development of standards and principles for safer Space
together with the proposed international tribunal;
●
collect and disseminate Space information as a clearinghouse.
We would like to emphasise that the ISA will only be in charge of executive and
operational tasks. Legal issues, such as Space traffic management, should be
addressed by a new international tribunal.
E. International Regulatory Agency (IRA)
In addition to the International Space Agency, we also want the European Union to
push for the development of an International Regulatory Agency (IRA), similar to the
International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) and the International Tribunal for the
Law of the Sea (ITLOS).
The agency would promote the implementation of international on-orbit services,
rendezvous, proximity operations, Space debris de-orbiting and safe disposal, as well
as standards for technical interfaces, designs, operations and transparency to foster
best practices, commercial participation and technological development to enhance
these Space activities.
In the context of the introduction of Space tourism and international suborbital travel,
it is not only important to develop sustainable and reusable crewed launchers, but
also to define and harmonise aerospace law regulations to guarantee safety
standards and prove jurisdictional support to incentivise their development. Europe
should therefore lay the basis of suborbital travel and Space tourism in European
and national laws and push for international agreements to extend the scope of
59


60
ICAOs or establish a new international civil association for suborbital travel and
Space tourism. In summary, the deployment of these tribunals could create the
necessary international framework for:
●
Space debris mitigation;
●
Space traffic management;
●
Space transportation environmental impact;
●
satellite light pollution regulations;
●
safety standards for crewed missions, Space tourism and suborbital
travel ( together with ICAO);
●
Space mining guidelines and regulations;
●
planetary protection policy;
●
standardisation
and
principles
for
safer
Space,
similar
to
the
International
Organisation
for
Standardisation
(ISO)
and
the
Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS).
F. Policy Recommendations
R.8.1. Europe’s trade agreements with third countries shall be used to ensure
the correct implementation and application of sustainable policies, practices
and incentives for Space access, exploration and exploitation. This is of
particular importance for the problem of Space debris, as there are currently
no international treaties.
R.8.2. Europe should increase expenditure on European Space programmes and
associations to at least one tenth of our defence expenditure. The level of
funding,
organisation
and ambition in Space exploration and human
spaceflight shall be at least comparable to that of NASA and CNSA.96
R.8.3. Member States should push for the creation of a European Union-led
Space Agency, encompassing the current ESA and EUSPA activities, subject to
a wider EU oversight and linked to long-term European policy objectives. This
also applies to highlighting the benefits of the coupled approach.
R.8.4. On
the
basis
of
several
factors
(including
increasing
internal
competitiveness, maintaining fairness and political stability), we recommend
to go forward with the progressive revision of the current Industrial Return
Coefficient to increase market competitiveness and foster innovation. his
would create more pressure for innovation in all sub-sectors where economic
considerations are decisive. At the same time, political stability should be
kept in mind by giving Member States' industry the necessary time to adapt
96 According to Euroconsult, the EU contributes to 9% of global investment in space exploration. Larrea
Brito, N., Clarence Dee, J. and Seminari, S., Global Prospect for Space Exploration: A Strategic and
Economic Assessment, IAC - The CyberSpace Edition, 12-14 October 2020. IAC-20,A3,1,4x57292
60


61
to change by staggering the reform.
R.8.5. Based on several factors (including political symbolism, the desire for
world collaboration and the need for strategic autonomy), we recommend
continuing the collaborative model for large Space missions and become an
equal partner for human Space flight activities for Moon and Mars
exploration, as well as developing a strategic autonomy in the development
of cost-effective European crewed Space transportation and sustainable
Space access systems.
R.8.6. Europe should push for the creation of an International Regulatory Agency
(IRA) similar to the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) and
International
Tribunal
for
the
Law on Sea (ITLOS), to promote the
implementation of international standards for on-orbit servicing, rendezvous,
proximity operations, Space debris de-orbiting and safe disposal, as well as
standards for technical interfaces, designs, operations and transparency to
foster
best
practices,
commercial
participation
and
technological
development to enhance these Space activities.
61


62
XII.
Education and outreach
Considering the scarce awareness of ESA among Europeans, we aim to increase the
importance and relevance of its work for citizens.97 Continuous education is one of the
tools to provide the population with comprehensive information on Space activities
and costs at every stage of life. We want to raise awareness of Space projects, their
effects on global society and individuals, the opportunities that Space technology
offers for everyday life and to stimulate economic growth. This task should not only
be carried out by the ESA, but also by national and European institutions, which
should work to ensure that Space as a discipline is easily accessible and available to
everyone.
Considering that most Europeans share the feeling of the European Union as a central
and competitive player in the Space arena, we want to make Space even more
appealing for its citizens by investing in more interactive participation between the
ESA and the public. This could be possible in various ways, such as the presence of
European astronauts at public events or in schools, or the establishment of an official
ESA Museum dedicated to European Space history. Through the museum, it would be
possible to give our citizens a more tangible relationship with European Space
activities - for example, through interactive tours, educational support, tours, movies
and merchandising. Another source of information must be the national Space
agencies and Member States. Thanks to language and geographical proximity, they
can increase the impact of Space knowledge on their citizens, both through national
programmes and space-related university studies. These studies should be as
interactive and interdisciplinary as possible, ranging from science to history and from
medicine to art. We believe that investing in culture and education gives Europeans
access to knowledge that brings them closer to building a better Europe together.
A.Policy Recommendations
R.9.1. Member States should include more affordable Space studies in all
educational levels' curricula, with a comprehensive review of Space science,
engineering,
and applications, as well as inclusion of Space aspects
throughout the curricula, particularly in non-space-related areas where Space
97 About 17% of the Europeans had never heard about ESA, and only 37% knew exactly what ESA is.
This survey was carried out by Harris Interview in December 2018 on a sample of more than 5000
people in France, Germany, Italy, Spain and the UK (the five most populous ESA countries). Survey
available at:
https://www.esa.int/About_Us/Welcome_to_ESA/How_much_do_European_citizens_know_about_spac
e
62


63
applications could bring synergies.
R.9.2. Member States must address the lack of female students in space-related
studies and STEM subjects, as well as raise female students' awareness of
Space issues and professions in order to motivate them to participate.
R.9.3. Europe should promote cooperation between ESA and European artists
and the film industry, as well as provide financial incentives for filming at ESA
locations.
R.9.4. We recommend the creation of an official ESA Museum dedicated to
European Space history, which currently houses the ESA’s archival documents
(Historical Archives of the European Union, Fiesole, Italy).
63


