Rules of Procedure of the Association
Volt Belgium ASBL/VZW
Adopted: 15.12.2024
Volt Belgium I Page 1


Introduction
Definitions
Amending the Rule of Procedures
Part I. General Rules
Article 1 - Working languages
Article 2 - Use of language in meetings
Part II. Membership
Article 3 - Application Procedure
Article 4 - Establishment of new membership category
Article 5 - Resignation Procedure membership
Article 6 - Exclusion of a Member
Part III. The General Assembly
Article 7 - Conduct of an Ordinary General Assembly
Part IV. Arbitration Commission
Article 8 - Powers and Sanctions granted to Chambers of the Arbitration Commission
Article 9 - Rotation of the Arbitration Commission
Article 10 - Safeguarding impartiality of the mediation and disciplinary processes
Article 11 - Amendments recommended by the Arbitration Commission or a temporary
Governance Committee
Article 12 - Grievances against a member of the Arbitration Commission
Part VI. Local Assemblies
Article 13 - Local Assemblies
Article 14 - Minutes of the Local Assemblies
Article 15 - City Functional Leads and Teams
Article 16 - University Chapters
Article 17 - Request by a Local Assembly for Electoral Commission oversight of a local
vote
Part VII. Other Organs
Article 18 - Conduct of an Official Meeting of an Organ of the Association
Article 19 - Accountability of Organs mandate holders
Article 20 - Validity of decision of organs with vacancies
Article 21 - By-election for organs with vacancies
Article 22 - Decision-making procedures
Article 23 - Creation of a Commission or Committee
Part IV. Integrity & Conflict Resolution
Article 24 - Complaints, Mediation, and Disciplinary Procedure
Article 25 - Expedited Disciplinary procedure
Article 26 - Submission of a complaint to the Arbitration Commission
Article 27 - Escalation to the Disciplinary Chamber
Article 28 - Objection by an Organ to the creation of a Commission or Committee
Part VIII. Voting Procedures
Volt Belgium I Page 2


Article 29 - Election and voting procedures
Article 30 - Fair and timely elections and voting processes
Article 31 - Proxy Procedure
Article 32 - Selection procedure of volunteers and staff to appointed mandates
Article 33 - Candidates presenting an alternative lead or co-lead ticket for election and/or
appointment
Article 34 - Election procedure for elected mandates
Part IX. Mandates
Article 35 - Cumulation of mandates
Article 36 - Responsibility of individuals holding an appointed or elected mandate
Volt Belgium I Page 3


Introduction
The General Assembly of the Association, having regard to its powers as foreseen in
Articles of Association hereby adopts, in accordance with the Articles of Association, the
following Rules of Procedures of the Association which are enforceable upon all Acts and
Decisions of Organs, Effective Members, and Association Members of the Association.
Definitions
The following definitions shall apply within the Association:
1) Body refers to a general encompassing term for an Organ or composition of
Members within the structure;
2) Assembly refers to a body with the ultimate Association authority over a defined
geographic jurisdiction;
3) Organ of Administration refers to the permanent executive body having specific
powers established by the Articles of Association or mandated by Belgian legal
provisions;
4) Commission refers to a permanent body mandated by an Assembly within its own
limitations set forth in the Articles of Association. Commissions perform to the
specifications of their mandates;
5) Committee refers to a permanent temporary sub-division of a body mandated by
an Assembly or a statutory Organ within its own limitations set forth in the Articles
of Association. Committees perform to the specifications of their mandates.
Amending the Rule of Procedures
In accordance with Articles of Association, any effective member may propose new rules or
amendments to the Rules of Procedure to the General Assembly.
Effective Members may propose amendments individually, grouped. When proposing
changes individually, such proposals must be supported by another Effective Member.
Volt Belgium I Page 4


Part I. General Rules
Article 1 - Working languages
The Association has the four working languages of English, Dutch, French, and German. It
operates in a spirit of language inclusivity. Members and Organs may validly deliberate in
any of the working languages during meetings of the Association.
Whilst the Articles of Association may be published in all four working languages, in case
of doubt, contradiction or interpretation problems between versions, the version
submitted to the Belgian authorities shall prevail.
All instruments and documents of the Association required by Belgian legal provisions
must be drawn up at least in the language of the judicial district in which the Association
has its registered office. This includes, among others, when requested by these legal
provisions and regulations, the minutes of the meetings of the General Assembly and the
Organ of Administration, as well as any instrument subject to be made public through a
legal publicity or to file requirements with the clerk's office of the tribunal of commerce.
All these instruments must imperatively be drafted at least in the judicial district's official
language. Versions in other working languages may also be prepared.
Article 2 - Use of language in meetings
Organs of the Association must make the best effort to ensure the Association is inclusive
particularly as regards enabling individuals to speak in their own language.
Volt Belgium I Page 5


Part II. Membership
Article 3 - Application Procedure
An Effective or Associate Member must complete an application procedure to benefit
from the rights and privileges foreseen for them. The applicant signals their interest to
join by filling out the appropriate forms to be found on the appropriate Volt Belgium
website. The applicant will then be invited to an onboarding interview conducted by an
authorised Effective Member having the necessary functional responsibilities, clearance,
and training to do so.
During the screening interview, the on-boarder provides brief details about Volt, confirms
that the information provided by the applicant and contained in the Volt database is
accurate and up-to-date, and then proceeds to conduct an interview to confirm
motivations and interests, aspirations, and alignment with Volt values and reviews
eligibility of the individual to join Volt.
If the applicant meets the eligibility criteria to join Volt Europa and consequently Volt
Belgium, the individual is reputed as benefitting from Associate Membership status until
such time as the payment for Effective Membership is confirmed by an individual who
benefits from access to the bank account and a cool-off period not exceeding one (1)
month has been observed for voting purposes, except where Associate Members are
entitled to also vote alongside Effective Members
The applicant is assigned to one of the City Teams and, if applicable, the appropriate
National Teams and the on-boarder may connect all of the leads (Leadership of the Local
Assembly,
National
and
Local Community Leads, and National Functional Leads)
concerned. The applicant member should also be further explained how to use the existing
Volt work platforms and channels.
Article 4 - Establishment of new membership category
New membership categories may be created by the Organ of Administration subject to the
approval of the Provincial Council. In its proposal to the Provincial Council, the Organ of
Administration must demonstrate why such a need exists and how the existing
membership tiers do not match the need as well as the proposed rights, obligations of the
membership category. The proposed membership category may never exceed the rights
and powers afforded to Effective Members. Once adopted by the Organ of Administration,
a notification should be sent to all Effective and Associate Members regarding the new
membership category, as well as a statutory proposal should the new membership
category be intended to be a permanent addition to the structures of the Association.
Volt Belgium I Page 6


Article 5 - Resignation Procedure membership
Effective members may cancel their resignation by written notice, it shall automatically
take
effect
within
one
(1)
week
of
the
initial resignation date issued in the
correspondence. If an individual so requests, they may indicate in their resignation letter a
later date upon which they wish their resignation to take effect.
If an Effective Member notifies within one (1) month of their resignation their decision to
rescind, the Association may consider the resignation as never having been tendered, the
Effective Member therefore does not have to complete the full application procedure
again.
Article 6 - Exclusion of a Member
A member may be excluded by the General Assembly, on the basis of a motivated
recommendation to do so by the Arbitration Commission, following a decision supported
by 2/3 of the sitting disciplinary chamber. The decision shall be provided in summary form
and appended to the Agenda of the General Assembly which shall make the decision.
At the General Assembly, both a spokesperson from the Arbitration Commission which
shall present the case and the motivation to the General Assembly, and the concerned
Member are allowed to speak in that order. Effective Members at the General Assembly
may ask clarification questions at the conclusion of both presentations.
Should 2/3 of the votes of the General Assembly support the Arbitration Commission, the
exclusion has immediate effect and must be notified in the register.
Volt Belgium I Page 7


Part III. The General Assembly
Article 7 - Conduct of a General Assembly
The Organ of Administration drafts the agenda of a General Assembly. The Secretary of
the Organ of Administration is responsible for the circulation of Agenda drafts.
Any additional Points must be requested by at least one-twentieth (1/20) of the Effective
Members in accordance with the Articles of Association. The Organ of Administration must
notify the authors of the request in a timely fashion should the request fail to meet the
necessary threshold.
Any items not on the agenda may be spontaneously deliberated upon but no vote may
take place.
The Organ of Administration must also appoint a Session Chair (and substitute) who will
chair the proceedings on the basis of the agenda and has a deciding casting vote.
Copies of all relevant documents to the General Assembly, such as financial accounts,
annual reports, proposed budgets and annual plans, must be circulated to all Effective and
Association Members by at least electronic means by the Secretary of the Organ of
Administration no less than 15 days to the holding of a General Assembly.
The Electoral Commission is responsible for drafting and presenting the text of motions
and the conduct of votes at the General Assembly, in close cooperation with Session Chair
and the Organs requesting the votes. Texts of motions should not be modified during the
General Assembly. The Electoral Commission together with the Organ of Administration
(and relevant functional leads) should explore all appropriate and feasible means available
to enable digital participation of all legal members in votes.
Volt Belgium I Page 8


Part IV. Arbitration Commission
Article 8 - Powers and Sanctions granted to Chambers of the
Arbitration Commission
The Arbitration Commission has been granted sanctioning powers, in order to fulfil its
mandated role.
The Mediation Chamber seeks to amicably resolve complaints put before it in the spirit of
Volt values as captured by its adopted Governance Documents. The Mediation Chamber
has the following limited sanctioning powers:
a)
Issuing advice on the interpretation of the Articles of Association, Code of
Conduct, Internal Rule of Procedure , or other adopted Governance Documents;
b)
Issuing a private, non-binding, recommendation to the contravening Party or
Parties;
c)
Issuing a private, binding, recommendation to the contravening Party or Parties;
d)
Rescinding a decision of an Organ of Association on the basis of
non-compliance to the Articles of Association, Code of Conduct, Internal Rule of
Procedure , or other adopted Governance Documents, including the
Governance Documents of Volt Europa;
e)
Escalating a case to the Disciplinary Chamber in accordance with the Internal
Rules of Procedure.
The Disciplinary Chamber seeks to bring justice by deciding on disciplinary measures to
stop unsanctioned behaviour. The Disciplinary Chamber has the following limited
sanctioning powers:
a)
Reject the findings of the Mediation Chamber, with the possibility of referring
the case back to a Mediation Chamber;
b)
Issue a public warning to the contravening Party or Parties;
c)
Issue a public reprimand to the contravening Party or Parties;
d)
Suspend the voting rights or mandates of the contravening Party or Parties;
e)
Recommend exclusion of the contravening Party or Parties as further defined in
the present Rules of Procedure of the Association.
Volt Belgium I Page 9


Article 9 - Rotation of the Arbitration Commission
The Arbitration Commission when conducting mediation or disciplinary review of a case
rotates its chamber membership so that no same individual sits in both the mediation and
the disciplinary proceedings of a case. It further compensates any potential bias with a
random selection of jurors from the Effective Membership.
To achieve this, for each case submitted to the Arbitration Commission, one of the two
Co-Chairs of the Arbitration Commission will supervise the work the Mediation Chamber
composed of one (1) full Member of the Arbitration Commission and one (1) Effective
Member randomly selected from the Register to serve a temporary mandate which they
may refuse, when this occurs, the next Effective Member randomly selected is invited to
sit. The chamber may elect within its midst who represents the findings of the mediation
proceedings to the Disciplinary Chamber.
The other Co-Chair, and any other full Members of the Arbitration Commission do not
participate in the mediation proceedings and are not privy to the content of the
proceedings. It is only in the event of an escalation to the disciplinary chamber that a new
chamber composed of the remaining co-chair, one (1) full Member of the Arbitration
Commission and one (1) additional Effective Member are invited to sit in the Disciplinary
hearing to review the case.
Article 10 - Safeguarding impartiality of the mediation and
disciplinary processes
Arbitration Commission members with a personal conflict of interest must declare them to
the Arbitration Commission and as such excuse themselves from the proceedings. When in
doubt, the Chairs of the Arbitration Commission makes the determination as to whether a
conflict of interest exists. Failure to declare the conflict of interest may be deemed a
procedural breach.
Article 11 - Amendments recommended by the Arbitration
Commission or a temporary Governance Committee
The Arbitration Commission, and/or a temporary Governance Committee in corroboration
with the Arbitration Commission, may draft and propose editorial adjustments to the Code
of Conduct as well as annexes to the Code of Conduct. The proposal must specify which
clauses or parts of clauses are to be annexed, which has the effect of making them
grounds for disciplinary action. A consensus decision of the Arbitration Commission is
sufficient to bring the attached document into effect, subject to ratification by the
General Assembly (ordinary or digital).
The Arbitration Commission may propose revisions to this document on which it has
reached consensus. These must be formalised in the form of a report to the General
Assembly. The Arbitration Commission may, at its own initiative, provoke a General
Assembly to ratify revisions under the supervision of the Electoral Commission.
Volt Belgium I Page 10


Article 12 - Grievances against a member of the Arbitration
Commission
Complaints lodged against a member of the Arbitration Commission must be addressed
with the specific individual excused. The Arbitration Commission may appoint a temporary
member to fill the vacant position for the duration of the case. If the case involves a
Co-Chair, an existing Arbitration Commission member temporarily is responsible for their
portfolio.
Volt Belgium I Page 11


Part VI. Local Assemblies
Article 13 - Local Assemblies
Established by virtue of the presence of at least six (6) Effective Members in the Register
of Members inside a defined commune and/or a group of communes in Belgium on the
basis of a decision by the Provincial Council. It ceases to exist by common agreement or
when the commune or group of communes drops below six (6) Effective Members in the
Register of Members.
The Local Assembly is composed of all Effective Members inside the defined commune or
groups of communes. It is presided over by a Session Chairman (or their Substitute)
appointed by the Local Assembly. Associate Members may be invited to attend the Local
Assembly which may grant the Associate Members voting rights on Local Assembly
proceedings by virtue of Article 11.
The Local Assembly meets at least annually, within 6 months of the Annual General
Assembly, and more if the interests of the Association so require. The Local Assembly
meets in a physical location within the commune or groups of communes of its jurisdiction
but may, should the need be felt and as determined by the City Lead or City Co-Leads, also
be exceptionally held virtually on a platform which can be accessed by all Effective
Members.
The exact date and time of a Local Assembly is communicated by the City Lead or City
Co-Leads and must be included in the formal convocation addressed to concerned
Effective Members and at minimum also to the Organ of Administration and the Electoral
Commission. A local Assembly may be provoked by a written request submitted to the City
Lead or City Co-Lead representing one-fifths (1/5) of the Effective Members of the
commune and/or group of communes.
Article 14 - Minutes of the Local Assemblies
They are kept in a register at the social seat of the Association in their original material
form, as well as in electronic form or similar support and in conditions guaranteeing
sustainability, readability, integrity, reliability and sustainable reproducibility. Each
Effective Member in the jurisdiction receives a copy of all Local Assembly minutes at least
in electronic form. The minutes are to be uploaded publicly on the Volt Drive. Unless
otherwise provided for by Belgian legal provisions or in the case of a special delegation by
the Organ of Administration, copies or excerpts of these copies or excerpts of these
minutes to be delivered to Third Parties or used in Courts or elsewhere, are signed by the
Secretary of the Organ of Administration or in their absence one other Administrator.
Volt Belgium I Page 12


Article 15 - City Functional Leads and Teams
Local Assemblies may elect and/or appoint individuals to represent the functions deemed
essential for our parties internal operations and growth at the local level and reflect the
areas listed in the National Functional Lead section. These roles are elected directly from
their respective Local Assemblies by the Effective and Associate Members for a renewable
term length of 1 year. The City Functional Leads are free to enlist the support of and/or
appoint members to aid in the operations of their function.
Article 16 - University Chapters
Subject to the approval of the Organ of Administration, Volt volunteers and members
associated or attending a University may establish official University Chapters to create a
bridge between Volt Belgium and the academic world.
Whilst they are not official Local Assemblies as understood by the present Article of
Association, they shall nonetheless be reputed, by decision of the Organ of
Administration, as benefiting from the rights, obligations and privileges afforded to Local
Assemblies so long as they subscribe to the Volt values as enshrined by the Code of
Conduct and governance documents. Effective members may be both members of these
University Chapters and still participate fully in all other activities and Organs of Volt
Belgium.
University Chapters shall be afforded facilities (i.e. email platforms, etc.) to perform in
accordance with Volt Belgium operational guidelines. Activities and communications shall
be coordinated, as appropriate, with the relevant functional teams.
Article 17 - Request by a Local Assembly for Electoral Commission
oversight of a local vote
A Local Assembly wishing to request Electoral Commission oversight or execution of a
local vote in accordance with the Article of Association must inform the Electoral
Commission at least one (1) week of the vote taking place. The Electoral Commission may
within 24 hours reject the request if it has no capacity to carry out the election but must
still provide technical and advisory support to the Local Assembly when it does so.
Volt Belgium I Page 13


Part VII. Other Organs
Article 18 - Conduct of an Official Meeting of an Organ of the
Association
Without prejudice to Article of Association or other Rules, official meetings of any Organ
of the Association must be notified to the required participants within one (1) week of the
meeting taking place if virtual and two (2) weeks if physical. A draft agenda with minutes
of the preceding meeting, and accompanying minutes should be included in the invitation.
Ideally this draft agenda can also be published publicly to Members in the event they wish
the Organ to deliberate (within the scope of its competences) on matters of interest.
At minimum, the minutes should capture:
-
those in attendance and excused;
-
any external guests invited and for which purpose;
-
and any decisions should be motivated appropriately and in reference to the
Organ's powers.
Minutes produced should be promptly published and communicated to the Membership
using appropriate digital means.
Circumstances may not always permit for an official meeting to be organised in time for a
time-sensitive decision to be made. In such circumstances and should conditions for an
official meeting not be met, the Organ’s Chair or Co-Chair may jointly exercise limited
executive authority to represent their Organ and take a decision on their behalf within the
limits of their Powers. Alternatively, the Organ may validly deliberate, if a quorum of more
than 50% of the Organ’s members are assembled at shorter notice, to adopt a provisional
decision which can be enforced until such time as it can be retroactively adopted at a
subsequent official meeting of the Organ.
Article 19 - Accountability of Organs mandate holders
Organs and holders of mandate and leadership positions within the Association whether
elected or appointed, should produce in an appropriate format and frequency, regular
activity reports at least to their supervising authority which summarise activity undertaken
and accomplished, and activities planned and foreseen within the remit of their mandate
or position and enabling the Association to maintain accountability for mandate holders.
Article 20 - Validity of decision of organs with vacancies
In the event that an Organ fails to secure the minimum number of mandate holders for the
available mandates, the Organ shall still be reputed as being operational and its decisions
valid so long as it is able to meet the minimum quorum that would have existed when all
the mandate holders are elected.
Volt Belgium I Page 14


Article 21 - By-election for organs with vacancies
At any point, an Effective Member can nominate themselves as a candidate for a vacant
post in one of the Organs of the Association. The Electoral Commission shall run within an
appropriate time frame, an election process and invite any other Effective Member that
may wish to nominate themselves. The Organ of Administration or the Organ itself may
also propose to the Electoral Commission to open an election for the vacant position at
their leisure.
Article 22 - Decision-making procedures
The respective levels deliberate internally and decide autonomously an appropriate
frequency for meetings, within the scope of the Articles of Association. Chairs for
meetings are the highest authority of level, or delegated individually. A meeting should
have an agenda and minutes must be taken capturing any decisions/ votes taken. The Volt
Google drive will host a minute folder for each level and constituent to house these
records and complete access permitted for all Effective members
Meeting minutes should be stored in an indexed folder on the Volt Google drive, to
centralise, and members are permitted to translate minutes into a duplicate doc if desired.
This applies to all National functional teams, Electoral & Values Boards with language
inclusion.
A regular Q&A is recommended to be organised by the co-presidents.
Article 23 - Creation of a Commission or Committee
The General Assembly and Local Assemblies may create, should the interests of the
Association require it, new Commissions within the limit of their powers and competences
as defined by these Articles of Association and without opposition to the competence and
Powers of other Organs.
Any administrator of the Association or a chair of an organ described in the Articles of
Association may create, should the interests of the Association require it, new Committees
within the limit of their powers and competences as defined by these Articles of
Association and without opposition to the competence and Powers of other Organs.
Volt Belgium I Page 15


Part
IV.
Integrity
&
Conflict
Resolution
Article 24 - Complaints, Mediation, and Disciplinary Procedure
A Member, Members, or an Organ that is unable to resolve a conflict or witnesses a
situation they believe breaches the spirit or letter of the adopted governance documents
may submit a complaint to the Co-Chairs of the Arbitration Commission. The Co-Chairs
shall determine whether the complaint should follow:
(a) An expedited Disciplinary procedure
(b) A referral to a Mediation Chamber in the event the conflict may be resolved by such a
procedure. The Mediation Chamber may escalate to a Disciplinary Chamber should its
findings determine that a serious breach has been observed by either involved parties.
(c) An immediate referral to a Disciplinary Chamber for complaints which involve alleged
grave breaches but do not concern the vital interest of Volt. In the event the procedure is
activated following an escalation by the Mediation Chamber, the members of the
Disciplinary Chamber may not be the same mandate holders that served on the escalating
Mediation Chamber.
Article 25 - Expedited Disciplinary procedure
Upon reception of a case the Co-Chairs may deem that a violation is sufficiently grave as to
warrant an expedited procedure, the Arbitration Commission will be required to convene
in full plenary in order to deliberate and execute their decision(s) with immediate effect.
The subsequent General Assembly will be called upon to ratify the decisions of the
Arbitration Commission in the case of an exclusion of a Member.
In the event of a manifest breach of the spirit or the letter of the Article of Association or
the Code of Conduct by Effective or Associate members which causes bodily or mental
harm to another individual or which contravenes the Code of Conduct such that the
reputation of the Association are damaged, the Arbitration Commission may initiate itself
an Expedited Disciplinary Procedure. In such circumstances, the Arbitration Commission
sitting in plenary may conduct any hearings it deems appropriate and issue a sanction in
accordance with the Rules of Procedure of the Association.
Article 26 - Submission of a complaint to the Arbitration
Commission
Respectful and robust debate is welcome and encouraged but should always be conducted
in accordance with the inclusive spirit of the Volt movement. Members should firstly seek
Volt Belgium I Page 16


to resolve conflicts in private, and failing that with their responsible Leads, and with
respect to the dignity of the other party and in accordance with the Code of Conduct.
However, should a Member, Members, or an Organ be unable to resolve a conflict
themselves, any of them (an individual Member or an Organ of the Association) may
submit a complaint to the Arbitration Commission if they believe the Acts of another
Member or a decision of an Organ of the Association breach the spirit or letter of the
Article of Association, Code of Conduct, or Rules of Procedure of the Association. The
Arbitration Commission may establish on its own accords the methods by which
complaints may be submitted. Cooperation with the proceedings is an essential
requirement for membership within Volt and failure to cooperate for example, by
providing a timely response to the requests of the Arbitration Commission, failure to
provide requested documents, or efforts to undermine the procedures may be considered
a breach subject to appropriate disciplinary actions.
The Arbitration Commission is invited to react to complaints as quickly as possible but
without harming the quality of its due process. As such, it shall have up to seven (7) days to
confirm receipt of a complaint and must render a decision as quickly as is practicable.
Should the Chair of the Proceedings believe that a case may require more than two
months to resolve due to the complexity of the case, it shall inform the need for such
extension that must be notified to all parties in a timely basis. The Arbitration Commission
shall examine the evidence provided by both parties and evaluate the merit of the case on
the basis of the spirit and the text of the Article of Association, the Code of Conduct and
any applicable Rules of Procedure of the Association.
All parties involved must maintain the confidentiality of proceedings in order to safeguard
the mediation procedure and agree to abide by the decisions of the Arbitration
Commission. Any failure to maintain the confidentiality of the proceedings by either
involved parties shall be deemed a serious breach in and of itself of the Article of
Association and Code of Conduct and subject to the full disciplinary powers of the
Arbitration Commission. The Arbitration Commission must at the conclusion of its
proceedings publish a motivated finding which also balances the respect of the privacy of
the parties involved.
Article 27 - Escalation to the Disciplinary Chamber
The Mediation Chamber may deem that a violation is sufficiently grave as to warrant a
sanction beyond its powers such as a public reprimand, suspension, or exclusion of the
Member. In such circumstances, the Mediation Chamber may escalate complaints lodged
to it to the Disciplinary Chamber which must review the case anew noting it is invited to
react to complaints as quickly as possible without harming the quality of the due process.
The Disciplinary Chamber must consider whether additional disciplinary action is necessary
beyond the powers of the Mediation Chamber and on the basis of the Mediation
Chamber's findings and those subject to a complaint.
The Mediation Chamber represents the plaintiff in these proceedings. Any party of the
proceedings may appeal a decision of the Disciplinary Chamber to the full Arbitration
Volt Belgium I Page 17


Commission which may choose to accept or reject the appeal only on the basis of a
procedural error on the part of the Disciplinary Chamber. In the circumstance that a
two-third (2/3) majority of the sitting Disciplinary Chamber determines the conditions are
united to foresee an exclusion by the General Assembly, an appeal to the full Arbitration
Commission on procedural grounds is not possible.
All parties involved must maintain the confidentiality of proceedings in order to safeguard
the disciplinary review and agree to abide by the decisions of the Disciplinary Chamber or
the Arbitration Commission in the event of an appeal. Any failure to maintain the
confidentiality of the proceedings by either involved parties shall be deemed in and of
itself a serious breach of the Article of Association and Code of Conduct and subject to the
full disciplinary powers of the Disciplinary Chamber. The Disciplinary Chamber must at the
conclusion of its proceedings publish a motivated finding which also balances the respect
of the privacy of the parties involved.
Article 28 - Objection by an Organ to the creation of a Commission
or Committee
Should an Organ contest the creation of a Commission or temporary Committee due to
conflicts of competence and Powers with another pre-existing Organ, they may submit a
complaint to the Arbitration Commission which may rescind the decision to create said
Commission or Committee solely on this basis.
Volt Belgium I Page 18


Part VIII. Voting Procedures
Article 29 - Election and voting procedures
The Electoral Commission should clearly communicate about the timings of elections, the
Electoral Commission taking into account potential requirements of the GA. The Electoral
Commission should always clearly communicate the form and rules of voting, including
how the results will be calculated before the election is opened. The Electoral Commission
should be neutral in their communication and organisation of votes, refrain from
introducing bias in the formulation and process, and safeguard the confidentiality of
participants as appropriate.
The Electoral Commission should always communicate the vote results within 24 hours of
the vote, which can be extended to 48 hours if a detailed explanation for this is provided
within 24 hours.
The Electoral Commission can also assess whether the candidates fulfil the requirements
to be a candidate for a condition and intervene if necessary. As part of the due diligence
process, the Electoral Commission may request from the Arbitration Commission a
confirmation that a candidate is not facing a Disciplinary procedure. Any applicant which
faces a Disciplinary procedure is not eligible for an appointed mandate until such time as
the Disciplinary procedure is concluded. Such information is considered privileged and may
not be divulged by members of the Electoral Commission except to the Candidate to
motivate the exclusion of the candidate from the election procedure.
The Electoral Commission can also communicate rules regarding the campaigning that is
allowed (e.g. use of Volt-channels) if they want to impose certain regulations or
restrictions on the amount of campaigning.
Article 30 - Fair and timely elections and voting processes
The Electoral Commission has a duty to conduct a fair and timely election or voting process
upon request by the appropriate body. The appropriate body may request the Electoral
Commission to conduct the election on a specific date, with the exception of General or
Local Assemblies. If the Electoral Commission cannot grant the request, they must notify
the body and provide an alternative date within eight (8) days of the request. If a vote
triggers additional votes, the Electoral Commission has to initiate them within an
additional eight (8) days of the vote having been concluded. In the case of inaction within
this timeframe, the Organ of Administration may request permission from the Arbitration
Commission to delegate the vote to a temporary Electoral Commission.
Volt Belgium I Page 19


Article 31 - Proxy Procedure
The Electoral Commission is responsible for providing a form to the organisers of a
General Assembly and/or a Local Assembly which enables the Electoral Commission to
verify the identity of the Member being represented by another member for voting
purposes (a proxy). The form shall be provided at the same time as the general
convocation by the organisers.
Article 32 - Selection procedure of volunteers and staff to
appointed mandates
Volunteers and staff must be appointed to mandates on the basis of a clear selection
procedure that encourages participation and affords sufficient time for candidates to put
themselves forward. That procedure may be conducted by the responsible Organ
represented through its Chairs or Leads, within the limits foreseen either by the
governance documents of the Association or the scope of the Organ’s mandate.
A custom procedure may be defined by the responsible Organs but always in collaboration
with the Organ of Administration or a designated officer responsible for recruitment,
which may impose a standardised process that applies for the whole movement. The
Electoral Commission will also be involved in such cases as required by the Article of
Association or by decision of a Local Assembly or the General Assembly.
The national Community Team establishes templates that must be used for job
descriptions, the publication of which shall form a part of any selection procedure. Job
descriptions shall at minimum include the title of the mandate, the context of the mandate
including reporting lines, scope of the mandate, limitations, and skills, competences and
profile of individuals sought for the mandate.
As part of the due diligence process, the responsible Organ may request from the
Arbitration Commission a confirmation that a candidate is not facing a Disciplinary
procedure. Any applicant which faces a Disciplinary procedure is not eligible for an
appointed mandate until such time as the Disciplinary procedure is concluded. Such
information is considered privileged and may not be divulged by members of the
responsible Organ except to the Candidate to motivate the exclusion of the candidate
from the selection and/or appointment procedure.
Article 33 - Candidates presenting an alternative lead or co-lead
ticket for election and/or appointment
Subject to prior authorisation by the Organ of Administration, the Electoral Commission
may be authorised to allow for executive mandates foreseen for an individual to be
opened up to proposed joint tickets (with the possibility of the individuals proposing
different
sharing
arrangements
for
the
responsibilities
of
the
mandate).
In
all
circumstances, the eventual voting rights related to one position, is limited to 1 vote for
one position, regardless of the number of people accumulating powers in one position.
Volt Belgium I Page 20


Article 34 - Election procedure for elected mandates
Where required by the adopted Governance Documents, the Electoral Commission has
exclusive competence to conduct elections and the processes of confirmation votes. To do
so, it is required to conduct elections on the basis of a declared and defined procedure
that it communicates in advance of the elections taking place. It may select the election
infrastructure it deems necessary to conduct. It may also establish any additional rules that
it may deem required to safeguard the fairness of election procedures and may impose
sanctions within the limits of its mandate and so long as they relate to the election
procedures.
The Electoral Commission has the exclusive competence to manage, coordinate, and
execute all national, regional and provincial elections including the processes of
confirmation votes. It may also, on request of a Local Assembly, supervise processes of
local elections and confirmation votes.
Volt Belgium I Page 21


Part IX. Mandates
Article 35 - Responsibility of individuals holding mandate
The functional areas are subject to change, subtraction or addition by the Organ of
Administration. National leads are appointed by the Organ of Administration, whilst local
leads are appointed by the Leadership of the Local Assembly with a confirmation vote of
the Local Assembly. If not otherwise mentioned, these positions are appointed for
renewable terms lasting 1 year.
National Functional Teams consist of volunteer Effective Members, volunteer City
Functional Leads respective to their function, and paid staff. National Functional Leads
have decision-making competence, supervised by the Organ of Administration and subject
to the scope of the General and Political Assemblies and Organ of Administration.
For each volunteer, staff, appointed or elected mandate of the movement, the mandate
holder shall be provided by the responsible Organ a job description which outlines the
duration of the mandate, responsibilities, reporting lines, powers and authorities which
shall form part of the election, appointment or selection, and onboarding processes.
The scope, powers, reporting lines of a responsible position may only be expanded or
restricted in agreement between the mandate holder and the appropriate body of
authority (see Articles of Association). The mandate holder is responsible for reporting and
presenting fairly and honestly the scope of their authority to others and not to mislead
them when doing so.
Should the mandate holder require, on the basis of their functions, to benefit from access
to databases containing personal data, they shall only be allowed to take up their
functions upon the signature of non-disclosure and a data processing agreements which
outlines the conditions by which they may access and use these databases exclusively for
the execution of the mandate. It shall be a prerequisite prior to the individual taking up
the mandate.
A mandate holder may seek to terminate the mandate. The mandate holder may do so by
addressing a written letter of resignation either to their responsible reporting line (i.e. a
Function or Leadership of the Local Assembly), or the Organ of Administration. The parties
together shall resolve an appropriate and practical date for the entrance into effect of the
resignation, taking into account the personal wellbeing of the resigning individual, the
context and the wellbeing of any direct reports. The mandate holder may be requested to
provide support to facilitate the hand-over to their successor.
When a mandate holder takes up another mandate which cannot be cumulated with the
existing mandate, the mandate holder is deemed to have stepped down from the first
mandate. The mandate holder will hold the old mandate ad interim until such due time
when a successor for the mandate is found, unless the responsible reporting line declares
the old mandate immediately vacant on the basis of breach of cumulation bans.
Volt Belgium I Page 22


Article 36 - Cumulation of mandates
As Volt seeks to empower and encourage every individual, the cumulation of mandates is
strongly discouraged in order to allow opportunities for every individual to take up a role
of responsibility and accountability and to prevent accumulation of power.
Members having a mandate in one of the statutory Organs of the Association may not hold
any other mandate within the Association. Additional mandates in the broader Volt
movement are strongly discouraged and subject to approval from the Arbitration
Commission.
Members having other mandates in the Association, such as functional leads or city leads,
may hold ad-interim responsibilities for additional mandates of the Association and the
broader Volt movement. Until such a time as an individual can be found to fill the role, this
role should be indicated as vacant on organograms to make it clear to prospective
candidates that Volt seeks to fill the role with an interested, competent individual.
Without prejudice to the Article of Association which defines certain roles which explicitly
may not be combined with any other mandates or functions in the movement, an individual
may only be in the Leadership of the Local Assembly for one (1) Local Assembly or chapter
at a time, even in an ad-interim function.
Article 37 - Mandates in other political movements
A Member may not simultaneously hold mandates or other responsibilities within the
Association and in other political movements with elected officials or
electoral
candidates.
Unless otherwise specified by the Political Assembly of the Association, a Member may not
simultaneously be a candidate for Volt in Belgium while holding mandates or other
responsibilities in other political movements with elected officials or electoral candidates.
Similarly, a member may not be a candidate for any other political movement
while
holding mandates or responsibilities within Volt Belgium.
Volt Belgium I Page 23
