Volt Europa Data Protection Report 2024 
 
 
Volt Europa Data Protection 
Report 2024 
Data Protection Officers 
Two DPOs, who have been on the team since 2020 and 2023, remained on the team in 
2024. At the end of 2023, these DPOs onboarded two more team members, who are 
experts in data protection law and technology.  One Data Protection team member 
resigned in 2024, leaving a total of three team members by the end of 2024. The new 
General Secretary responsible for Legal started joining the fortnightly DPO calls from 
April 2024. The team implemented a more efficient emailing system. 
The Data Protection Officers can be contacted at dpo@volteuropa.org. 
Accountability 
As requested, the Data Protection team advised national chapters on questions 
related to data protection. The team also set up a separate group for collaboration 
amongst all Data Protection teams within Volt, with a monthly check-in call to discuss 
i.a. best practices. 
Data subject rights 
As in previous years, the DPOs received multiple subject access requests from 
individuals. The DPOs coordinated the requested actions, such as providing 
information, correcting or deleting personal data, in close cooperation with the 
General Secretary, the IT Team who has access to the databases and the respective 
chapter. The team implemented a workflow to efficiently deal with the incoming 
requests from data subjects. 
Revised privacy note 
The Data Protection team has been collaborating with, among others, the IT Team to 
revise and update Volt Europa’s privacy policy to ensure it is aligned with the latest 
legal requirements and organisational practices. The Data Protection team paid extra 
attention to sub-processors, joint controllership, data sharing and data retention 
periods. The Data Protection team also worked to ensure the privacy note matches 
the national chapters’ privacy policies, using Germany as an example. In October, the 
new external privacy note was published on the Volt Europa page and can be 
amended as needed. The chapters that use the Volt Europa privacy notice have been 
asked to update theirs accordingly. 
 


Volt Europa Data Protection Report 2024 
 
 
Internal audit 
Two DPOs met with the internal audit committee in April to answer questions about 
Volt’s data protection practices, ultimately to ensure compliance and manage any 
risks. The members of the Data Protection team also signed Non-Disclosure 
Agreements to ensure confidentiality of the information handled by them.  
Future outlook 
Volt Europa will continue to respond to data requests and provide guidance where 
necessary, while supporting national chapters in managing their own responsibilities. 
Regular updates, ongoing monitoring and proactive advice remain essential to 
ensuring Volt’s continued compliance with data protection regulations.​
  
December 2024 
The DPO Team 
 
 


