Code of Conduct
Volt Belgium ASBL/VZW
Adopted: 15.12.2024
Volt Belgium I Page 1


Volt Principles
Volt Codework
1. Status
2. Boundaries
3. Oversight
4. The process of updating, revising and attaching documents
5. Attached documents
6. Volt Philosophy & Values
7. Unique Political Family
Volt Principles
8. Rights and Refuge
9. Equality for all
10. Respect of others
11. Solidarity
12. Freedom
13. Transparency
14. Created for everyone
Volt Belgium I Page 2


“Volt is a progressive movement. We uphold principles that value equality, human
dignity, and human rights no matter what: we will not compromise on our
fundamental values, and will stand up for them in every corner of Europe, every
time it is needed. We founded our movement on these pillars: we do not take
decisions based on “what our background is” or “where we grew up”, we do not
trump people’s rights because “it feels wrong” or because “we are scared”, we
cannot hide from tough questions because “they make us feel uncomfortable” or
because “voters will not like it.” For this reason, we will not back down from a fight
necessary to advance, uphold or defend the rights of somebody just because it is
unpopular with the electorate. Our fundamental values are formed based on the
respect of human rights, the respect of others, justice, human dignity, solidarity,
democracy, equality before the law, freedom, and the rule of law. In practice, here
are some of the values that are fundamental to Volt, and upon which Volt was
created: equality for all (which includes gender equality, LGBTIQ+ rights, principles
of non-discrimination), freedom of religion, the belief in a secular state, abortion
rights and refugee rights. This list is not exhaustive but it aims at depicting Volt’s
commitment
to
the
rights
of
every person in the European continent.”
Fundamental Values, Volt Europa.
Volt Belgium I Page 3


Volt Principles
Rights and Refuge: Everyone deserves to feel welcomed in Volt. Volt is a sheltered
environment, enveloped in our beliefs that everyone has inviolable dignity.
Equality for all: We’re all different, and that’s a celebration! In Volt we ensure that
difference doesn’t become a disadvantage, that difference enriches us, and
ultimately makes us stronger.
Respect of others: Volt recognises the vitality of enthusiastic debate, and we
commit to this with the ethos to build each other up, that we all have so much
more to learn and that we’re all on this journey together.
Solidarity: Volt subscribes to expansive cooperation, and we believe we grow
fastest and best when we prioritise the growth of each other. Every citizen has
leadership potential, and our citizens spread Europe-wide.
Freedom: You are your own person, and Volt protects that even when the Party
itself forms collective decisions.
Transparency: ‘A different way of doing politics’, we tout this only because we
practise this! Our operations and decisions are all about openness, whilst still
preserving personal confidentiality. We run a political Party like no other!
Created for everyone: With so many rights come so many responsibilities, and in
Volt we tackle this head on! We believe that responsibility and accountability are
fair exchanges for a society that meets the needs of all.
Volt Belgium I Page 4


Volt Codework
1.
Status
1.1.
The Code of Conduct is an aspirational document, the purpose of both it
and the Volt Belgium (hereinafter referred to as “The Association”)
Mediation and Disciplinary Process are to foster a positive and welcoming
environment for all Volt Members that is safe and empowering for all of its
Members. Disciplinary actions are measures of last resort.
1.2.
The Code of Conduct applies to all Members of the Association. It forms
part of the chapter’s Volt Values framework as set out in the Articles of
Association and Rules of Procedure of the Association.
1.3.
The Articles of Association grant provisions that decree a serious breach of
this Code of Conduct may constitute grounds for disciplinary action. When
considering disciplinary action, it is the clauses in the section titled Volt
Principles that shall be considered by the Arbitration Commission, in
conjunction with the Boundaries and the Status. Documents that are
formally attached to this Code, as set out below, are to be considered part
of the Volt Principles section.
2.
Boundaries
2.1.
The document's purpose is to provide a clear set of standards that instigate
disciplinary action if breached, and to guide Members (Effective and
Associate) and non-members (volunteers, family, friends, etc) in how they
are expected to conduct themselves. In the rest of this document the
subsequent term ‘members’ includes non-member volunteers also.
2.2.
The Code of Conduct also applies to all activities carried out for or on behalf
of Volt, for which Volt members are responsible, including informal social
activities, digital platforms and any other forms of interaction at which Volt
members are present.
2.3.
This Code of Conduct stands alongside and complements other governance
documents of the Association, such as the Articles of Association and the
Rules of Procedures of the Association.
Volt Belgium I Page 5


3.
Oversight
3.1.
This document is to be kept under review by the entire membership of Volt
at a General Assembly, and is a specific delegated competence of the
Arbitration Commission to update, and propose revisions and attachments,
under the conditions set forth in the Articles of Association and Rules of
Procedure of the Association. This also extends when appropriate to the
remit of a Governance Committee.
4.
The process of updating, revising and attaching documents
4.1.
Stated in the Articles of Association is the process of updating, revising,
attaching, and removing documents. The Rules of Procedure should also be
consulted in the scope of this process. The competency of the Arbitration
Commission relating to this can be found in the Articles of Association.
5.
Attached documents
5.1.
Each attached document or segment is to be listed here, giving precise
details of which the attached clauses are; the date of attachment; the
means of or authority for attachment; and the date or version number of
the attached document.
5.2.
The following documents or sections of documents are attached to this
Code. A breach of them constitutes a breach of this Code for disciplinary
purposes.
6.
Volt Philosophy & Values
6.1.
The Associations’s approach to ethical conduct is guided by its humanitarian
and core values, which are based in respect with the principles on which the
European Union is based, as guarded in the European Convention on Human
Rights (ECHR)1 and described by the preamble of the Lisbon Treaty2 and Art.
2 TEU3; the protection of human dignity, liberty, democracy, equality, equal
opportunities, (European) solidarity, justice, respect for the rule of law and
human rights, including the protection of minority rights.
6.2.
Volt views the primary function of public service as action towards the
benefit of the citizens and residents of the State. As members of the
3 Treaty on European Union, 7 February 1992
2 Treaty of Lisbon, 13 December 2007, amending the Treaty on European Union and the Treaty
establishing the European Community
1 The European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR)
https://www.echr.coe.int/Documents/Convention_ENG.pdf
Volt Belgium I Page 6


Association, and in the aim of providing a political public service, the code of
conduct enshrines the aforementioned objective and will. As core tenants,
the principles of management by objectives, transparency, accountability,
citizen empowerment, and sustainability form cornerstones of the Party’s
formal operations.
6.3.
Methodologically, Volt aims to operate in a science-informed manner, and to
present
our
humanitarian-based
values
through
calm and reasoned
discussion.
7.
Unique Political Family
7.1.
The Association is or takes the necessary steps to be a member association
within the Europe-wide political organisation Volt Europa. It is therefore in
the interests of the Association to consider the wider networks and
considerations of the family chapters and the broader umbrella level, Volt
Europa. In this regard, Members are beholden to exact due diligence when
interacting with other chapters, characterised by the responsibility to
regard external chapter codes of conduct when involved in their legal
jurisdiction.
Volt Belgium I Page 7


Volt Principles
Each clause below applies standards that must not be violated.
8.
Rights and Refuge
8.1.
The Association should be a political association and movement in which
anyone internally or externally can feel safe, feel welcome and appreciate
membership, at all levels of involvement.
8.2.
Oppressive, abusive or discriminatory conduct should be stopped; this
includes but is not limited to: sexism, racism, transprejudice (gender identity
discrimination), and sexualism (sexual orientation discrimination), ageism,
ableism (disability discrimination), or classism (economic discrimination).
Any type of such behaviour is a violation of this Code.
8.3.
Volt Belgium holds a policy of zero tolerance for physical, emotional and
mental abuse. Members should not: shout at; be aggressive to; make
damaging or insulting remarks about another member; or disrupt a
discussion. This includes sexual harassment, which is defined as unwanted
conduct of a sexual nature whether it is verbal, non verbal or physical.
8.4.
Volt members should not feel harassed for financial contributions, either a
set fee is announced in advance of an activity or a donation method is used
but in no circumstances are donations from members to be insisted upon or
intimidation/coercive methods used.
8.5.
Volt uses analogue and digital means of communication with and among
members, caution and responsibility is advised in their use.
9.
Equality for all
9.1.
Diversity is a strength that should be welcomed in the Association and
members should strive to accommodate the different needs of members
wherever possible. This surrounds cultural backgrounds, and individual
differences that members need to actively show consideration and respect
for.
9.2.
As the Association boasts membership from a wide range of backgrounds,
contrasting political or philosophical perspectives will frequently emerge
within discussions. Freedom of belief and the right for that belief to change,
are fundamental individual human rights. Members should therefore
exercise tolerance and respect in these discussionary instances.
Volt Belgium I Page 8


9.3.
Members should expect differing ideas and approaches to problem solving
and conduct in a positive and open-minded dialogue to encourage
collaboration and cooperation without suppressing others.
9.4.
In disagreements members are expected to behave civilly and exercise
greater caution not to display behaviour that could be perceived as
provocative, intimidating or offensive.
10.
Respect of others
10.1.
It’s Volt’s ethos that in all interactions with colleagues, we assume the best
of them. This includes being open-minded to potential misunderstandings,
miscommunications and giving each other the benefit of the doubt.
10.2.
The normative approach is to 'Attack the argument, not the person'.
Criticism should not be used to humiliate, undermine or otherwise engage
in personal attacks.
10.3.
Members should communicate politely and with sensitivity towards other
members, whether in-person or digitally. Members have the right to
disagree but this should not translate into hostility or adverse treatment.
10.4.
Members should not criticise fellow members publicly, whether internally or
externally. If necessary, criticism should be given with due sensitivity and
constructively delivered through the appropriate medium.
10.5.
In public Volt spaces members are permitted to engage in honest and
critical debates in accordance with 10.2, the aim being to reveal issues,
misunderstandings, discuss topics and educate each other.
10.6.
Offensive rumours, unfounded negative gossip or falsities about other
members have no place within Volt.
11.
Solidarity
11.1.
Members should be inviting and inclusive, nurturing fellow members to
become more confident and to participate. Collaboration is key within the
entire Party.
11.2.
Members should make sure that everyone requesting talking time is
listened to properly, without unnecessary interruption. Decisions should be
made by consensus of the attendees wherever possible. If not possible,
there should be the possibility to vote and decide based upon a majority.
Volt Belgium I Page 9


11.3.
Members should work in a time-conscientious manner to achieve the
objectives listed in their responsibilities. Clear time-frames should be
communicated and reasoned flexibility used in circumstances that prevent a
task from completion within this specification, as well as foresight, to reach
out for further support or delegation if necessary.
11.4.
Members should afford each other appropriate levels of trust in the
enactment of their responsibilities, allowing them room for initiative and
leadership. Whilst there should be encouragement to seek support when
needed and offered it when appropriate.
11.5.
Members should be aware when reaching out to other members that they
have jobs, family and/or other time-constraints, and exercise patience whilst
awaiting a response. Members should also not put pressure on fellow
members to volunteer their time or overwhelm them with work or
responsibilities beyond their capacity. Communication is operative in
managing a work-life balance.
11.6.
As part of the Volt Europa umbrella, the Association’s members also adhere
to the Volt Europa charter, Rule Book, and also to any further EU level codes
of conduct set forth by the EU level in accordance with their set procedures.
11.7.
Members who fail to abide by the EU level Codes will fall under EU level
disciplinary jurisdiction.
11.8.
Disciplinary
procedures
involving
one
or
multiple
members
of
the
Association at the EU level will be supported by the Association and its
Arbitration Commission, to advise, and enforce sanctions if necessary.
11.9.
In the case of a dispute between Association levels (Volt Europa-Association
or Association-Association), the Articles of Association, Rules of Procedure
of the Association and Code of Conduct prevail due to the current
circumstances surrounding legal jurisdiction.
12.
Freedom
12.1.
Members’ right to freedom of thought, conscience and belief should be
observed, following the European Convention on Human Rights.
12.2.
Members in a position of responsibility must meet the legal obligations of
the Association, keeping adequate and accessible records of decisions and
communications. Failure to provide these records, as required by the
Association, is a breach of conduct.
12.3.
When
engaging
actively
as
a
Volt
member,
(physical
or
digital)
communications about the Association’s policies must not conflict with
Volt Belgium I Page 10


actual policy of the Association. If there is personal opposition to the
political policy, members should either explicitly state their opinion as their
own or voice both the Association’s policy as well as their own perspective.
Personal
opinions
and
criticisms
should
be
detached
from
Volt
communications.
12.4.
Members who voice viewpoints in situations where their membership of the
Association is known must be careful not to negatively impact the
Association’s public standing.
13.
Transparency
13.1.
Members have an honour-bound obligation to excuse themselves from
decisions in which they have an interest, this interest must also be declared.
13.2.
Members should, as elected representatives of the Association, consider
their private actions when said actions affect the reputation of the
Association.
13.3.
Members are required to be honest about themselves and their history
when offering their candidacy to represent Volt on Belgian territory. This
includes opposition to any of Volt’s policies, guiding ethics or values.
Disclosures should be given due confidentiality and submitted via the
appropriate channels. This transparent duty continues throughout any
appointment.
13.4.
Those responsible in the selection, appointment, co-option or election
process, must ensure disclosures are obtained as set out in the preceding
clause.
13.5.
All written communication sent ‘on behalf of Volt Belgium’ must not be
used for personal gain or go against the Association. This applies to digital,
physical or verbal communications.
13.6.
Even as an Association committed to transparency, there are circumstances
where members are required to respect individual confidentiality and
privacy in accordance with European fundamental rights. Complaints must
be taken through the appropriate internal channels, specified in the Articles
of Association and the Rules of Procedure of the Association, these include:
concerns, grievances, complaints, and appeals, and not discuss these in an
ordinary meeting agenda, or publicly.
Volt Belgium I Page 11


14.
Created for everyone
14.1.
Members are obliged to respect the consensus formed within the
Association, at any level: local, national, or any other Association organ or
group through the Association’s democratic process. Individual opinion and
speech is still maintained and encouraged internally.
14.2.
Members have a duty to familiarise themselves with all procedures and
policies relevant to their role in the Association and the wider Volt network.
14.3.
Members should act in accordance with professional and civil standards of
conduct,
internally
and
externally,
including
political
rivals;
and
non-members when acting in an Association’s capacity, or when identifiable
as a Volt member.
14.4.
No member or Association organ may try to persuade another member to
surrender or violate a statutory right or obligation.
14.5.
Requisite authority is required when acting on behalf of the Association.
Members must not exceed their entrusted level of authority, nor act in a
manner which assumes greater authority than that which was entrusted, or
misleads other members.
14.6.
Individuals holding a mandate within the Association are responsible for
proactivity in the identification of circumstances where behaviour entailed
in clause 8.2 is taking place, and taking the necessary steps alone or jointly
with others to ensure remedial actions are taken.
14.7.
Association activities must be adequately accessible and inclusive; providing
for linguistic needs is priority, and no member should feel isolated for a lack
of language or level, provisions must be made available to accommodate,
and in alignment with Articles of Association.
14.8.
Members organising or hosting events and activities have a duty of care to
act inclusive and civil. Due diligence must be taken to avoid harm through
negligence or failure to assess risks.
14.9.
Making a clearly provoking or malicious complaint; utilising the complaint as
a form of harassment; openly abusing the complaint process to attack an
individual grudge, a rival or another member within Volt Belgium are all
breaches of conduct.
Volt Belgium I Page 12


