voltuk.org
Manifesto
General Election 2024
Empowering 
Change
Together


voltuk.org
Volt UK stands for a Europe based on a strong political union 
between the European nations, where risks are shared and 
benefits reach all Europeans, and where every person has a 
voice. It stands for a Europe with a robust economy that provides 
opportunities for all, now and for future generations, a Union 
that is an economic powerhouse. It stands for a Europe that takes 
care of its people, where children enjoy a cleaner environment, 
where migration flows are managed together, and where rights 
are guaranteed and responsibilities shared. Volt UK stands for a 
truly progressive European project.
We have a plan to make Britain ready for the future, by rising 
above the divisions in our societies and rebuilding a sense 
of belonging and unity. To help achieve this, we will lead by 
example by building bridges with other political forces to start 
a constructive dialogue; promote progressive and redistributive 
policies; and base solutions on fairness and scientific evidence 
instead of ideologies. 
The united Britain we envision will be a  strong voice within the 
EU, and able to fit its global role side by side with its European 
family. By rejoining a reformed, transparent, and citizen-friendly 
European Union,  we can amplify our economic influence, enhance 
security cooperation, and achieve a greater global impact through 
a united front. We recognize the complexities of this path, but 
joining forces with a reformed Europe is the best way for Britain 
to remain a strong global player.
British independence and national identity will be safeguarded 
in the empowering framework of the European Union. We plan 
to bring power as close as possible to citizens, where they can 
understand it and keep it accountable. To do that, we plan to 
embed citizen assemblies in the heart of public administration and 
strategic companies, enabling citizens to directly contribute to 
policy decisions. Additionally, we aim to grant greater autonomy 
to the countries and regions of the UK on issues where they are 
best suited to make decisions.
You, the citizens, are the driving force behind our policies. 
We’re committed to empowering you beyond just casting a 
ballot. We will empower you through information, education, 
and responsibility. We will enable you to actively participate in 
shaping our democracy through methods like citizen assemblies 
and electronic voting on an extended range of topics. Today’s 
world demands a collective effort from all of us. From confronting 
global threats like pandemics and climate change to countering 
totalitarian regimes, the challenges we face require all of us to 
take ownership of our actions and work together.


voltuk.org
1. Rejoin the EU
Our aim is to rejoin the EU as a full member, re-enter key EU 
programmes, adopt EU standards and regulations, and join the 
Customs Union and Single Market to strengthen our ties with 
Europe.			
2. Overcoming global challenges
We will set ambitious climate targets, start a transition towards 
a circular economy, lead in tech regulation, tax AI profits for 
social security, and work to ensure energy independence and 
affordability.
3. Renewed economy
We propose a fairer tax system, incentives for research & 
development and innovation, digitised tax collection, a flexible 
and secure labour market model, and support for lifelong 
learning and apprenticeships to foster economic growth.
4. Rebuild politics and empower citizens
To build a genuine, citizen-led, political system we will 
implement proportional representation, secure e-voting, 
enhance government digital platforms, and support citizen 
assemblies and regional governments.
5. Inclusive and Fair society
We advocate for affordable housing, protecting access to 
abortion and LGBTQIA+ rights, banning conversion therapy, 
ensuring timely mental health support, and promoting a 
compassionate and inclusive society.
5 Objectives for our citizens	


voltuk.org
The European Union represents a unique political and 
economic partnership that has delivered peace, stability, 
and prosperity for its member states. 
By rejoining the EU, the UK can regain access to the world’s largest 
single market, foster stronger ties with its neighbours, and benefit from 
collaborative programmes that enhance education, security, and scientific 
research. By contrast, Brexit has been damaging economically and socially. It 
has brought no tangible benefits, and it has paved the way for a dangerous 
wave of populism. Volt unequivocally stands for full membership in the 
European Union.
In the interim, we aim to align the UK as closely as possible with the 
EU’s regulatory framework and enhance our cooperation.
We will take a gradual approach and seek to join the Customs Union 
and Single Market before the UK is ready to rejoin as a full member.
Moreover, we will seek to rejoin vital EU initiatives such as Europol, 
Euratom, and Erasmus+.
There will be a focus on sharing data and collaborating with European 
countries.
We pledge to reform the EU to bring it closer to citizens, and make it 
more transparent and representative.
Rejoin the EU
1


voltuk.org
The modern world is faced with challenges that require citizen 
involvement, global cooperation, and forward-thinking solutions. 
Volt UK is committed to addressing these issues head-on, ensuring that the 
UK plays a leading role on the global stage. Our focus spans from regulating 
emerging technologies to achieving energy independence and safeguarding 
the environment, all while fostering human rights and inclusivity.
The UK on the global stage
Maintain and strengthen the UK’s role as a bulwark of freedom and 
democracy, in close cooperation with European and global allies.
Unconditionally commit to the Trident nuclear deterrent and long-
term integration towards a single, shared, nuclear umbrella for Europe.
Reaffirm the UK’s unwavering commitment to NATO, ensuring that our 
defence spending continues to meet or exceed the 2% of GDP benchmark, 
thereby strengthening our collective security and operational readiness.
Strengthen the capabilities of the UK’s National Cyber Security Centre 
and National Cyber Force to protect national infrastructure, counter 
cyber threats, and enhance cooperation with international partners to 
address current global cybersecurity challenges.
Long term integration of the armed forces with other NATO/EU allies 
to better protect Britain and share procurement costs.
Ensure comprehensive support for service members and veterans, 
including mental health services, housing, career transition 
programmes, healthcare, education, and employment assistance.
Unconditional support for Ukraine  until it regains full control over its 
internationally recognised 1991 borders, including Donbass and Crimea, 
in accordance with the Budapest Memorandum of 1994. Additionally, 
we pledge to support Ukraine as a long-term ally in peacetime.
Side with all civilians in Israel and Palestine, supporting an immediate 
ceasefire, the release of all hostages, and a lasting resolution to the 
conflict where there is no space for any war crimes committed by 
either side. Advocate for accountability through the International 
Criminal Court and the International Court of Justice to ensure justice 
and uphold international law.
Overcoming Global Challenges
2


voltuk.org
Energy Independence and Affordability
Fund and support solar and wind energy projects across the UK.
Develop initiatives to support renewable local energy production and 
reduce dependency on imports.
Invest in research and development for renewable energy technologies 
and efficiency improvements.
Support projects for building new nuclear reactors that are subject to 
stringent conditions on safety, waste, and financial transparency.
Upgrade the national grid to better handle renewable energy input 
and improve efficiency.
Provide subsidies for businesses and households to adopt renewable 
energy solutions.
Establish a long-term energy strategy that includes strategic reserves 
and innovative storage solutions.
Encourage responsible energy consumption through digital education 
and incentives.
Immigration and Asylum
Keep the UK within the European Court of Human Rights.
Carry out deportations humanely, focusing on safety rather than 
political posturing.
Promote human rights and solidarity, keeping Britain open and 
connected to the world.
Seek an arrangement with the EU as close as possible to free movement 
on the path to rejoining the EU.
Reform the immigration system to attract the workforce that Britain 
needs.
Allow refugees and asylum seekers to work and integrate as soon 
as their application is accepted, to avoid pushing them into illegal 
activities.
Rejoin the Dublin Regulation for better coordination with European 
countries, reforming it to include an effective burden-sharing 
settlement system. 
Protecting the Environment
Abide by the principle that economic growth should not take precedence 
over the environment and wellbeing.
Reinstate EU environmental standards that have been repealed 
after leaving the EU.


voltuk.org
Europe-wide, aim to reduce greenhouse gases by 80% by 2030, 
achieve climate-neutral energy production by 2035, and net climate 
neutrality by 2040.
Implement a Carbon Tax in cooperation with the EU to fund 
environmental protection and climate adaptation.
Promote a circular economy by mandating the production of durable 
goods that are easy to repair.
Assist businesses in transitioning to a circular economy with tax 
incentives, streamlined regulations, and digital training and assistance.
Phase out single-use plastics progressively and consider taxing plastic 
packaging.
Offer incentives for take-back schemes.
Invest in environmental research and technologies and ensure proper 
funding for monitoring air, water, and land quality.
Repeal legislation permitting water companies to discharge raw 
sewage into rivers, and accelerate efforts to clean and restore our 
rivers and lakes.
Governing  technology
Regulate technology advancement to make it serve progress and 
wellbeing.
Invest in local development by enhancing AI education and training 
programmes to equip people in the UK with the skills needed to 
innovate and lead in the AI sector.
Build on the UK’s established position, and tie closer relations 
with the EU, to place the UK at the forefront of AI regulation and 
implementation.
Support AI profit taxation in both national and European parliaments, 
using the revenue to fund social security.


voltuk.org
Volt UK envisions an economic revival that balances the free 
market’s dynamism with necessary state interventions. 
Our goal is to create a fair and thriving economy where innovation flourishes, 
businesses grow, and every citizen has the opportunity to prosper.
Implement a fairer tax system that reduces the burden on lower and 
middle-income earners while ensuring corporations and high-income 
individuals contribute their fair share. 
Address risk of capital flight with targeted measures in cooperation 
with our European partners in national and European parliaments.
Introduce tax incentives for businesses investing in scientific research 
and strategic sectors.
Foster a supportive environment for innovation and entrepreneurship 
through startup incentives, access to funding, and an updated 
intellectual property regime.
Strengthen anti-tax avoidance measures in line with EU directives and 
increase international cooperation.
Combine flexible labour markets with a strong welfare system. This 
approach promotes job security, economic dynamism, and adaptability 
for both employers and employees.
Increase funding for childcare and develop flexible options to support 
working parents and enhance workforce participation.
Incentivise businesses to support lifelong learning and continuous 
professional development, ensuring a competitive and adaptable workforce.
Expand apprenticeship programmes to provide hands-on training and 
career development opportunities for young people.
Integrate the UK more closely with European research initiatives to 
foster collaboration and access to cutting-edge developments.
Offer tax breaks to companies investing in R&D to encourage 
innovation and technological advancement.
Renewed Economy
3


voltuk.org
Foster partnerships that combine the UK’s leadership in the law and 
regulation fields with the EU’s economic and geopolitical weight to 
ensure effective enforcement of patent law worldwide.
Create special research and testing innovation zones with light 
regulation to spur technological advancement and economic growth.
Invest in smart grid technology to improve energy efficiency and 
reliability, drawing lessons from countries like Germany.
Encourage investments in renewable energy sources to ensure long-
term energy security and sustainability.


voltuk.org
Volt UK is dedicated to revitalising democracy and empowering 
citizens through comprehensive reforms. 
By enhancing democratic participation and supporting local communities, we aim to 
create a more inclusive, transparent, and responsive governance system.
Democratic Reform and Participation
Replace the First-Past-The-Post system with Single Transferable Vote. 
This  proportional representation voting system will allow voters 
to choose their preferences and ensure fairer representation in 
Parliament.
Support the formation of citizens’ assemblies and devolved regional 
governments to ensure that local voices are heard and citizens have a 
say in policy-making.
Consider the implementation of an electronic voting system to enable 
UK citizens to vote online on a broader range of issues, increasing 
accessibility and participation.
Expand the government’s digital platforms to make them more 
user-friendly, providing easier access to parliamentary proceedings, 
documents, and other resources.
Start an open national debate on the reform and modernisation of 
the Houses of Parliament: review the nature of the second chamber, 
update the rules by which the House of Commons works to allow 
and encourage our representatives to be effective legislators and to 
improve the separation of powers between the legislature and the 
administration.
Introduce national holidays on election days to encourage voter 
participation and ensure everyone has the opportunity to vote.
Rebuild Politics and
Empower Citizens
4


voltuk.org
Rebuild Local, Regional, and National Communities
Ensure councils are financially supported and equipped to provide 
essential services, tying the funding to scrutiny by citizens through 
local assemblies, transparency rules, and electronic voting and 
participation.
Empower Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland with more autonomy 
to address local needs and priorities.
Explore the case for nationalising transport companies, with 
mechanisms to make them accountable by setting clear rules for 
transparency and involving citizens and public administration in 
scrutinising processes.
Empowering through education  
Build a free-at-point-of-use digital platform, open to all citizens 
and residents, to provide lifelong education on subjects including 
citizenship education, life competences and responsibility, tolerance, 
mental health, and media literacy. 
Promote STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts and 
Mathematics) subjects to maintain Britain’s leadership in all fields, 
including culture.
Offer better compensation and training for teachers to address 
shortages and workloads.
Rejoin the Erasmus+ scheme to foster European integration in the 
long term.
Healthcare
Ensure the NHS does not face increasing privatisation; rebuild NHS 
capabilities so that subcontracting need only be done as a temporary 
stop gap.
Create new scrutinising bodies that will include citizens, doctors 
and nurses in the boards, and which will hold meaningful powers in 
the way the NHS is run - for instance, they could veto decisions or 
force reviews. The scrutinising bodies will be set up both locally and 
nationally to help prevent the mismanagement of resources. 
Replicate good practice schemes that have been proven to be 
effective elsewhere, and promote healthy lifestyles through lifelong 
education to prevent diseases. 
Re-enable freedom of movement with the EU to ease some of the 
staff shortages in the healthcare sectors in the short term. In the long 
term, train the workforce locally and retain them through adequate 
pay and fair working conditions.
Advocate a joint procurement scheme with other European countries 
to bargain for better prices for medical supplies.


voltuk.org
Volt UK is committed to building an inclusive and fair society that 
respects and protects the rights of all its citizens. 
Our social reforms focus on ensuring equality, justice, and dignity for everyone, 
while our housing and law enforcement policies aim to create safe and supportive 
communities.
Social Reforms
Respect the principle that humans are the only owners of their bodies, 
and base decisions on scientific evidence and compassion.
Ensure abortion is a healthcare, not criminal, matter by enshrining a 
right to abortion within current limits, withdrawing punitive measures 
from existing legislation.
Ban conversion therapy outright.
Guarantee timely access to mental health support and gender-
affirmative care.
Prohibit all medically unnecessary “sex-normalising” surgeries and 
sterilisation on intersex babies, deferring treatment until they can 
participate in the decision.
Allow administrative recognition of protected characteristics 
according to the Equality Act 2010 in official documents and forms for 
intersex and non-binary individuals.
Law Enforcement
Negotiate closer bilateral agreements with European countries to 
align standards, improve extradition and judicial cooperation, and 
facilitate real-time data access.
Increase liaison officer numbers and enhance operational and strategic 
collaboration, particularly on cybersecurity and terrorism.
Rejoin Europol, ensuring a better understanding of organised crime 
and terrorism threats.
Provide police forces with adequate funding and powers.
Inclusive and Fair Society
5


voltuk.org
Housing
Enable councils to build or purchase large amounts of new homes 
that will be rented below current market prices. The initial cost will 
be recouped through rent revenue over the years. This will end the 
de-facto monopoly of private landlords on the housing rental market, 
contributing to lowering overall housing prices.
Suspend the Right to Buy scheme to encourage council housing 
development and maintain social housing stock, helping to keep the 
private sector in check.
Set ambitious targets for house-building to match demand. 
Promote the construction of new homes by reforming urban 
planning to balance local input with the need to address housing 
shortages, and actively involve the local community in decision-
making.
Promote high-density urban planning that integrates green spaces, 
ensuring sustainable and liveable urban environments.
Implement a progressive Vacancy Tax and regulate short-term 
rental platforms, freeing up more housing for long term rentals, and 
increasing supply.


voltuk.org
@voltukofficial
@ukvolt
Vote Volt on 4th July for a 
united, empowered 
and future-ready 
Britain!
Read our European policies in 
full at volteuropa.org/policies 
