Europe’s best
for North Rhine-
Westphalia (NRW)
SHORT ELECTION PROGRAMME 


LIGHTHOUSE TOPICS
Modern schools	
5
Renewable energies	
6
New politics	
7
Ministry of Digital Affairs	
8
EUROPEAN | DEMOCRATIC | ACTIVE
Empowering young people for Europe	
9
Political participation for everyone	
9
Rethinking security	
9
Disaster protection	
10
CLIMATE NEUTRAL I ENTREPRENEURIAL I DIGITAL
Municipality, state, and federal government 	
11
Financing of cities and municipalities	
11
Digital network expansion	
11
Structural change using the example of the Ruhr region	
12
CITY | COUNTRY | CHANGE
The future of rural areas	
13
Individual mobility 	
13
Quality of life in the city	
14
SELF-DETERMINED | SOLIDARY | INCLUSIVE
Healthcare
15
Strong families	
15
Studying in Europe	
16
NRW and the Church	
16
EUROPE’S 
BEST FOR 
NRW
Volt | Short election programme State Election NRW 2022 | 2


EUROPEAN I DEMOCRATIC I ACTIVE
CLIMATE NEUTRAL I ENTREPRENEURIAL I DIGITAL
CITY I COUNTRY I CHANGE
SELF-DETERMINED I SOLIDARY I INCLUSIVE
It is time for a New Politics: a politics that puts people first and 
sees itself as a service provider; a politics that not only recog-
nises the challenges of the 21st century but also solves them; a 
politics that thinks beyond national borders in order to solve the 
great challenges of our time by working together.
We have written down our vision for NRW in 4 chapters:  
Digitisation needs added value - at schools, in administration, at 
work. We stand for a genuine energy transition that promotes 
and prioritises renewable energies. For us, politics is transpa-
rent and always people-oriented. We want to restore trust. This 
requires a fresh perspective on politics and a fully comprehensi-
ve lobby register. 
For this we campaign at all levels: in the European and Dutch 
parliaments, in city councils all over Europe and in many city 
councils in NRW. We are the first truly pan-European party!
It is time for the best of Europe in the NRW state parliament!
EUROPE’S 
BEST FOR 
NRW
Volt | Short election programme State Election NRW 2022 | 3


Light|house
[Substantive]
A tower that lights the way for the helmsmen and women. 
Lighthouses provide orientation, warn of shoals and show 
where the journey is leading.
What do we need for this? A compass so that we do not for-
get the most important anchors: Justice, freedom, solidarity, 
human dignity and equal opportunities. Because that is how 
we will find the way to a New Politics for NRW together!
Synonyms: Compass, main focus 
OUR LIGHTHOUSE TOPICS
Volt | Short election programme State Election NRW 2022 | 4


MODERN SCHOOLS
Already before the Corona pandemic it 
was clear that there are severe deficits in 
the digitisation of schools in North Rhine-
Westphalia. There is a lack of equipment, 
suitable infrastructure, training and further 
education, personnel and standards for 
digital solutions. In addition, teachers are 
often left alone when it comes to digital 
media, which means they lack valuable time 
for their core task: ensuring the education, 
upbringing and individual support of pupils.
	
>The development of a teaching and 
learning culture with a higher propor-
tion of digitisation which offers added 
value in terms of the individualisation 
of teaching, so that the development of 
weak pupils and the demands of strong 
pupils can be achieved simultaneously and 
efficiently. 
	
>The reliable provision of pupils and 
teachers with digital devices even after 
the current subsidies have expired. In 
future, all pupils from lower secondary 
level onwards should have a digital de-
vice. Regular maintenance, repair and new 
purchases are to be ensured by suitable IT 
specialists. 
	
>Prompt creation of the necessary tech-
nical infrastructure for schools. This 
includes, for example, an appropriate 
number of electrical sockets in the class-
rooms, gigabit-capable cabling in the 
school buildings, connection to the inter- 
net via fibre optics and equipping the 
premises with wireless LAN. 
	
>IT support, for example user administ-
ration, maintenance of servers and acti-
ve network components (e.g. switches, 
WLAN access points) as well as data 
security matters must be carried out by 
qualified specialists on site at larger 
schools. Schools without an IT administ-
ration of their own should be able to fall 
back on IT experts provided by the state 
government. 
	
>Teaching in the age of digitisation offers 
the potential to take a big step towards 
the personalisation of learning opportuni-
ties. The differences in academic perfor-
mance in learning groups make it impossi-
ble for teachers to respond to every child 
and young person in such a way that they 
are all fostered and challenged accor-
ding to the full extent of their individual 
needs and capabilities. The use of digital 
teaching materials offers completely new 
possibilities, such as the simple provi-
sion of explanatory videos and tasks at 
different levels, also taking into account 
different special needs. Therefore, Volt 
advocates for the amendment of quality 
criteria for teaching and learning mate-
rials so that they become more interacti-
ve and descriptive. 
	
>The “Primus School” in North Rhine-West-
phalia is a type of school that already 
meets many of our demands with regard 
to individualised teaching. We therefore 
want to expand their number.
Volt | Short election programme State Election NRW 2022 | 5


RENEWABLE ENERGIES 
We want to make NRW CO2-neutral by 
2035 and climate-neutral by 2040. To 
achieve this, the production and use of 
energy must be considered in terms of its 
impact on the climate. Renewable ener-
gies (RE) are the basic prerequisite for 
effectively reducing CO2 emissions and 
combating climate change (e.g. for e-mo-
bility, electric heat, etc.). Presently, NRW 
is still heavily dependent on coal and 
other fossil fuels: About two-thirds of 
the final energy consumption is obtained 
from fossil energy sources (as of 2018). 
Renewable energies are only used to a 
small extent in NRW: in 2019, their share 
of state-wide electricity consumption 
was only 16%, and the RE share of the 
consumption of all energy sources used 
domestically was even only around 5%. 
Due to the strict proximity regulations 
and the relatively dense settlement, the 
expansion of renewable energies is se-
verely restricted. Lengthy administrative 
and legal proceedings are an impediment 
to the expansion of wind power in parti-
cular. 
	
>We are calling for a coal phase-out until 
2030. 
	
>The annual expansion quota for renewa-
ble energies must be increased, specified 
and implemented. 
	
>The 1000 metre distance regulation for 
wind energy plants should be replaced 
by an intelligent solution that is oriented 
towards the real impact on local resi-
dents. 
	
>The energy infrastructure must also be 
adapted to the new energy mix. 
	
>The expansion of smart electricity and 
heat grids must be further advanced. 
	
>The power fluctuations arising from 
renewable sources must be addressed by 
energy storage in order to ensure grid 
stability. 
	
>In energy use, preference must be given 
to the most appropriate technologies 
(in terms of CO2 emissions and energy 
efficiency). 
	
>Through power-to-fuel processes, all fos-
sil fuels still needed must be replaced 
by e-fuels by 2035. 
	
>A citizens‘ portal on energy transition 
in which information, status, goal, and 
potential of the energy transition in NRW 
are presented in a comprehensible way 
will ensure transparency regarding the 
implementation of the energy transition.
Volt | Short election programme State Election NRW 2022 | 6


NEW POLITICS
Confidence in politics is declining. Ac-
cording to a survey (Statista: 2020), only 
34 % of respondents have confidence in 
the federal government and only 16 % 
in political parties. In NRW, according to 
surveys, only 43 % of respondents trust 
the current state government.
Volt NRW sees a lack of transparency as 
one of the biggest problems in politics, 
increasing mistrust and frustration with 
politics. In order to obtain information, 
currently a request has to be submitted 
in a cumbersome way.  
	>Allowances, grants or donations of € 25 
or more for members of parliament as well 
as additional income of € 0 or more must 
be reported and disclosed. 
	>As a rule, committee meetings must be 
streamed publicly. 
	>The Freedom of Information Law must be 
reformed. We demand that the publication 
requirements for state agencies be expan-
ded to include contracts for public services, 
appraisals, statistics, administrative regu-
lations, public plans and geodata, and that 
they be made accessible to all people in a 
central and free information register. 
	>The cooling-off period of former govern-
ment members must be raised to three 
years to prevent corruption and dispro-
portionate lobbying. 
	>By introducing a Lobby Register, trust 
in democracy can be regained again and 
corruption made more difficult: 
	
>	A Lobby Register is to be introduced 
for contacts of members of the State 
Parliament, the State Government and 
the highest State authorities. This Re-
gister must be publicly accessible on 
the internet. 
	
>In addition to details on advocacy, the 
register will also record an executive 
and a legislative footprint for each 
law to clearly show where influence 
was exerted and by whom. 
	
>Violations are to be made an offence 
and provided with relevant sanctions 
as well as benefit confiscation. Serious 
violations must be made public. 
	
>To ensure compliance, an independent 
auditing body must be established to 
check and report violations
Volt | Short election programme State Election NRW 2022 | 7


MINISTRY OF DIGITAL
AFFAIRS
 
The digitisation efforts in Germany re-
semble a pieced-together patchwork. In 
order to establish a comprehensive stra-
tegy, higher-level coordination is neces-
sary. We want to bundle local expertise 
and, with a digital ministry, create a clear, 
uniform and superordinate contact per-
son in order to be able to act more effec-
tively and, above all, more quickly. 
	
>An autonomous Ministry of Digital 
Affairs of the state of NRW creates the 
framework for digitisation to be imple-
mented easily, quickly and securely on all 
levels of public administration. 
	
>In addition to coordination, the new 
ministry‘s tasks also include financing 
the projects and initiatives of the futu-
re digital initiative (strategy). 
	
>Procurement and supplier manage-
ment with regard to technical and 
digital materials are to be centralised. 
	
>Existing initiatives and programmes 
such as Open:NRW, Digitalstrategie.
NRW or Digitale Wirtschaft NRW will 
be managed centrally in the ministry. 
	
>The ministry actively supports the 
other ministries and municipalities in 
the implementation of digitisation 
measures. The Digital Ministry should 
also actively seek cross-border coope-
rations in order to participate in best 
practices from Germany and Europe or 
to develop them jointly.
Volt | Short election programme State Election NRW 2022 | 8


EUROPEAN
DEMOCRATIC
ACTIVE 
 
EMPOWERING YOUNG PEOPLE
FOR EUROPE 
Volt NRW stands for a European pluralism 
that is already being practised at school. 
	
>We want to give pupils the opportunity to 
go on at least one EU-level school ex-
change during their school career. 
	
>We demand special consideration of 
European topics in the development of 
future core curricula. 
	
>We advocate an expansion of cross-
border educational projects at the state 
level with schools from Belgium or the 
Netherlands. 
POLITICAL PARTICIPATION FOR
EVERYONE 
Volt NRW is committed to ensuring that the 
diversity of society is reflected in political 
institutions and organisations.
Political participation of people with 
disabilities
	
>We demand barrier-free access to all 
public information, particularly regarding 
the formation of political positions, the 
exercise of the right to vote, and running 
for elections.
	
>We call for mandatory minimum stan-
dards in establishing barrier-free access 
for all public bodies and authorities as 
well as for public service broadcasting. 
Political participation of migrant people
	
>We demand the introduction of voting 
rights for EU citizens with main resi-
dence in NRW (3 years) in state elections 
and for non-EU citizens with permanent 
residence in local elections. 
	
>We are committed to facilitating access to 
public information by making it available 
in further languages. 
Political participation of young people
	
>We call for the lowering of the voting 
age in state elections to 16 years and of 
the right to vote in local elections to 14 
years. 
RETHINKING SECURITY 
Volt NRW stands for security authorities 
that can meet the challenges of our time. 
	
>We demand a restructuring of the cur-
rently 47 district police administrations. 
This should result in a significantly smaller 
number of administrations with compara-
ble size and performance as well as lean 
administrative structures. 
	
>We stand for modern digital resources 
that are oriented towards the needs of 
the staff. We advocate an overall digital 
concept, ideally involving all federal 
states and the Schengen countries.
Volt | Short election programme State Election NRW 2022 | 9


Cooperation within the EU should be ex-
panded and joint projects with our Euro-
pean neighbours should be advanced. 
	
>We advocate the strengthening of the 
public order offices. For this we demand 
centralised training, the formation of co-
operative alliances and a police property 
protection service, so that the police can 
better manage their core duties. 
	
>We support the increased use of spe-
cialists in complex investigations and an 
appropriate remuneration for them. 
	
>We call for a comprehensive survey on 
racist, extremist and discriminatory atti-
tudes in all public offices. We advocate 
for more transparency and the creation of 
an independent investigation authority in 
the event of any corresponding allegati-
ons. 
DISASTER PROTECTION 
Against the background of the flood disas-
ter on 14 July 2021, in which parts of North 
Rhine-Westphalia were flooded and people 
lost their lives, Volt NRW sees a massive 
need for action in disaster prevention and 
mitigation.
	
>We call for an improved warning infras-
tructure. To this end, warning sirens 
must be set up in all towns and cities. Cell 
broadcasting, which is already used in 
many countries, is to be introduced nati-
onwide.
	
>We stand for a fusion of civil protection 
and disaster management on a national 
level. 
	
>We see all responsibility for civil protec-
tion not in the Ministry of the Interior, but 
in a separate state office. 
	
>We demand that European cooperation 
be strengthened, with NRW providing 
further capacities for the European Civil 
Protection Pool and participating in 
rescEU.
Volt | Short election programme State Election NRW 2022 | 10


CLIMATE NEUTRAL
ENTREPRENEURIAL
DIGITAL 
 
MUNICIPALITY, STATE
AND FEDERAL GOVERNMENT  
Volt NRW stands for a reform of the cur-
rently rather arbitrary structure of the 
federal states as well as for a systematic 
removal of duplicate structures on the ad-
ministrative levels in NRW.
	
>We call for preparations of a fundamental 
reform of the current federal system. 
The reform should allow a clear separa-
tion between federal and state tasks. A 
corresponding reform commission should 
also examine the advantages and disad-
vantages of a significantly reduced num-
ber of federal states. 
	
>We want to divide the administrative 
districts east of the Rhine into only 
two administrative districts. While one 
administrative district is to contain the 
entire Ruhr district, the administration of 
the remaining, more rural regions of the 
previous administrative districts of Arns-
berg, Detmold, Münster is to be assigned 
to the second administrative district. 
	
>We advocate a central office for the analy-
sis, comparison and evaluation of proces-
ses in the state ministries and authorities. 
The goal must be to trigger a continuous 
improvement in administrative proces-
ses in NRW.
FINANCING OF CITIES AND
MUNICIPALITIES
Volt NRW stands for a reliable financing 
of the municipalities in NRW in order to 
ensure the continuous provision of public 
services by the municipalities. 
	
>Together with other federal states, we 
advocate the consideration of a nationwi-
de abolition of the trade tax. The elimi-
nation can be compensated by increasing 
the municipalities‘ share of income, sales 
or corporate income tax. 
	
>We demand that the federal government 
and the federal states assume the full 
costs for the social benefits regarding 
housing and heating for people seeking 
employment. 
	
>We urge NRW to participate more strong-
ly than in the past in joint tasks and to 
make its subsidies and financial assistance 
to the municipalities plannable in the 
long term. 
DIGITAL NETWORK EXPANSION 
Volt NRW advocates a digital infrastructure 
expansion along the road and rail traffic 
routes as well as in rural areas. 
	
>We demand that the coordination and 
supervision of the glass fibre expansion 
be carried out by the Gigabit offices of 
the state of NRW in close cooperation 
with the Federal Network Agency as well 
as the municipal institutions. 
Volt | Short election programme State Election NRW 2022 | 11


	
>We want to achieve full coverage of NRW 
with fast fibre-optic connections with at 
least one gigabit per second in download 
and upload by 2027 at the latest. 
	
>We want to implement complete cover-
age with 5G in NRW by 2025. 
STRUCTURAL CHANGE USING
THE EXAMPLE OF THE RUHR REGIO 
Volt NRW supports a successful and sustai-
nable structural change in many regions of 
NRW, exemplified in the following by the 
Ruhr region.  
Political and administrative reform
	
>We advocate a municipal reorganisation 
of the 15 municipalities of the Ruhr 
region into one independent city-mu-
nicipality. 
	
>We want to create a district exclusively 
for the Ruhr region as part of a reorgani-
sation of the administrative districts in 
NRW. 
Economic innovation and support
	
>We want to further support the growing 
IT sector and the specialised expertise 
that has been gained there. 
	
>We will support and help to interconnect 
the growing mechanical engineering in-
dustry in its efforts to digitalise and tap 
into new markets. 
	
>We want to actively involve the thriving 
logistics industry in all regional and supra-
regional transport projects and further 
develop the Ruhr region as a hub for 
goods and industrial products. 
	
>We will continue to promote tourism as a 
means of advertising the Ruhr region as a 
place to live and to invest. 
Reducing long-term unemployment
	
>We are committed to expanding re-trai-
ning opportunities for employees from 
sectors that are in long-term contrac-
tion, so that they can find a new role in 
future-oriented industries.
Volt | Short election programme State Election NRW 2022 | 12


CITY
COUNTRY
CHANGE
THE FUTURE OF RURAL AREAS 
Against the background of the current 
challenges, Volt NRW stands for a streng-
thening of rural areas.
	
>We support active efforts to promote 
town, city, and regional centres in order 
to stop further proliferation of urban 
sprawl. 
	
>Before designating new residential areas, 
we see the need to give greater consi-
deration to unoccupied and idle sites 
as well as areas in medium-sized centres 
with a history of contamination. 
Day care centres and schools in rural 
areas
	
>We advocate more flexible forms of care 
in small villages lacking a childcare 
centre of their own. Qualified „village 
mothers and fathers“ should be allowed 
to take over childcare as a team. 
	
>We demand a review and adjustment of 
the requirements for daycare mothers 
and fathers with the aim of reducing bu-
reaucracy while at the same time ensuring 
professional standards. 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE IN RURAL AREAS
	
>We support the targeted development of 
distribution structures, such as mobile 
village shops. These should ensure the 
supply of everyday products at one‘s own 
doorstep. 
	
>We want to promote the expansion of 
charging infrastructure for battery-po-
wered electric vehicles in both public 
and private spaces to make e-mobility 
more accessible in rural areas. 
Rural economy
	
>We advocate the establishment of regio-
nal innovation hubs to connect university 
research with the rural areas. 
	
>We stand for regional companies to be 
able to apply for public contracts as easily 
as possible - e.g. by reducing bureaucra-
tic hurdles.  
INDIVIDUAL MOBILITY 
Volt NRW wants to create the possibilities 
for individual mobility so that people do not 
have to rely on their own car.
	
>We demand that the state government 
of North Rhine-Westphalia advocates the 
introduction of a regular speed limit of 
30 km/h within towns and cities. 
	
>We want to see a greater expansion of 
rail-based public transport and its fur-
ther electrification. Old routes should - 
where possible and necessary - be reacti-
Volt | Short election programme State Election NRW 2022 | 13


vated and the existing routes expanded. 
	
>We will accelerate the expansion of 
the barrier-free accessibility of public 
transport. 
	
>We are in favour of expanding the possibi-
lities for transporting bicycles in public 
transport. 
	
>We want to make it easier to change the 
use of individual lanes on multi-lane 
roads to bus or eco-lanes. 
Road construction financing
	
>We call for the abolition of the municipal 
charges so that residents no longer have 
to pay road construction fees. This kind of 
financing is unjust and threatens liveli-
hoods. 
QUALITY OF LIFE IN THE CITY 
Volt NRW wants to enable quality living in 
the city and for this reason sees the need to 
set the course for an effective transforma-
tion now. 
	
>We strive for the redensification and the 
multiple or mixed use of sealed areas in 
order to increase their efficiency. 
	
>Following a best practice approach from 
the Netherlands, we want to introduce 
subsidy programmes for the energetic 
refurbishment of buildings with an annual 
renovation rate of at least 4 % in exis-
ting buildings.
	
>We want to set up comprehensive pro-
grammes to replace heating systems, 
which will increase the share of heat 
pumps to 60% of all heating systems by 
2035. 
	
>We want to make sustainable use of 
newly built roof surfaces mandatory 
from the first square metre for private, 
but especially for commercial and public 
buildings. 
	
>We stand for measures to improve air 
quality, such as switching to zero-emissi-
on transport and expanding green spaces 
as well as the filtering of pollutants from 
the air. 
	
>We advocate limiting the time in which 
buildings are illuminated and reducing 
illuminated advertising displays in public 
spaces in order to reduce light pollution. 
	
>We promote the „city of short distances“, 
as this not only reduces traffic volume 
and CO2 emissions, but also leads to pass-
engers reaching their destinations more 
quickly.
Volt | Short election programme State Election NRW 2022 | 14


SELF-DETERMINED
SOLIDARY
INCLUSIVE
HEALTHCARE
 
Volt NRW wants to achieve comprehensi-
ve patient care by (specialist) physicians, 
health care providers and nurses. This is 
needed in order to contribute to the health 
of society as a whole and to relieve the 
strain on our healthcare system. 
	
>We want to increase investments in 
hospitals. 
	
>We advocate for the nationwide establish-
ment of so-called 24-hour emergency 
clinics in rural areas. 
	
>We want to strengthen family doctor-
centred care in NRW. In doing so, we aim 
to make general practice more attractive 
and to strengthen medical care in rural 
areas. 
	
>We support the state chamber of nur-
sing professions that is already being 
established. The chamber will give nurses 
the opportunity to self-manage, to pro-
mote the quality of their profession and 
to participate politically. 
	
>We want to make the emergency ser-
vices in NRW fit for the future. To this 
end, we are planning, among other things, 
a standardisation of the emergency ser-
vice infrastructure and the same state-
wide treatment guidelines for emergency 
paramedics 
STRONG FAMILIES 
Volt NRW stands for extensive participation 
in social life for children and young people, 
regardless of their family model, origin, or 
the economic situation of their parents.  
	>We are committed to ensuring that diffe-
rent and diverse family models are given 
equal legal and social status. 
	>We advocate a strict review of school regula-
tions and school materials in order to elimi-
nate from them any form of discrimination. 
	>We demand the rigorous implementation of 
the UN Convention on Children‘s Rights. 
	>We strive to ensure that in order to protect 
against sexualised violence, the quality 
standards of all prevention services are regu-
larly checked and expanded. 
	>We demand that social work be sustaina-
bly anchored and financially backed in all 
educational institutions. 
	>We support the participation of children and 
young people from financially disadvanta-
ged families in clubs (especially sports and 
music clubs). Furthermore, the free use of 
public transport should be made possible for 
all pupils. 
Volt | Short election programme State Election NRW 2022 | 15


	>We want to further expand youth, mother 
and parent centres as well as multi-gene-
ration houses. 
STUDYING IN EUROPE 
Volt NRW wants to promote the expansion 
and creation of new cross-border coopera-
tion with universities in the area bordering 
the Netherlands and Belgium.  
	
>We want to create the framework condi-
tions for the creation of a Euregio Uni-
versity Network with our neighbouring 
countries The Netherlands and Belgium. 
The Euregio University Network should 
enable studying, teaching and research 
„without borders“ and become a driver 
of innovation through cooperation with 
companies. 
	
>We aim to extend the NRW Semester 
Ticket far into the Netherlands and Belgi-
um to stimulate European exchange while 
enabling students to travel sustainably. 
	
>We would like students to be able to com-
plete at least 10 % of their examinations 
(ECTS credits), ideally 20 % of the ECTS, 
completely freely at a university belon-
ging to the Euregio university network. 
An alignment of the semester duration, 
as has already been implemented, for 
example, at the University of Mannheim, 
should prevent time gaps in cross-border 
studies. 
	
>We call for the establishment of a com-
mon digital learning platform for the 
universities belonging to the university 
network.  
NRW AND THE CHURCH 
Against the backdrop of the abuse scandals 
that have repeatedly emerged, Volt NRW 
stands for a fundamental reassessment of 
the relationship between the state of NRW 
and the church. 
	
>We want to enforce that, in case of a su-
spected criminal offence, such as crimes 
against sexual self-determination, the 
public prosecutor‘s office investigates in 
all cases. 
	
>We advocate that church-run institutions 
(kindergartens, day-care centres, hos-
pitals, nursing homes and care services) 
should no longer be subject to church 
law alone, but also to general national 
law. In addition to fundamental rights, this 
includes employee rights and contractual 
remuneration. 
	
>We stand for the obligation of church in-
stitutions to be transparent with regard 
to hiring, dismissals, admission of people 
under their care and working condition.
Volt | Short election programme State Election NRW 2022 | 16


Volt Nordrhein-Westfalen | Kirchfeldstraße 53 | 40217 Düsseldorf
Have we made you so curious that you want to join us? 
Then we cordially invite you to get a better idea of who we 
are. There are three ways to do this: as a volunteer, mem-
ber or supporting member. Of course, we are also happy to 
receive your donation.
VOLUNTEER
Would you like to get involved as and when you feel like it 
and not enter into any binding commitments? Then you can 
implement your ideas as a volunteer in your local team and 
participate in events and activities - Europe-wide, of course. 
MEMBER
You want to get started right away and are sure that you 
want to help shape politics throughout Europe at Volt? As a 
member, you have all the rights to vote on contents, candi-
dates and board members, or to stand for election yourself. 
You can work in all teams - from the local to the European 
level - and support our organisation with your membership 
fee. 
SUPPORTING MEMBER
You have got plenty to do, but you think we‘re great? Then 
become a supporting member and make a significant contri-
bution to the sustainability and progress of our project. For 
as little as €10 per month, you can help build our vision and 
organisation.


You‘ve done it! You now have an overview of what Volt 
NRW stands for and what we want to change in the state 
parliament.
You can find more information about our work in your
region or city  here.
EPILOGUE
www.voltnrw.org


