Leading the Charge for a Sustainable Future

Leading the Charge for a Sustainable Future

At Volt Kosova, we recognize that environmental challenges transcend borders and require collective action at all levels. Our commitment to fostering a sustainable, resilient, and green future is at the core of our mission. We aim to implement innovative and effective policies that protect our natural resources, promote renewable energy, and ensure sustainable urban development. Together, we can build a healthier, more sustainable Kosova for future generations.

Roadmap to Climate Neutrality by 2040

Strengthen cross-border solutions

A bold strategy to meet the Paris Agreement 1.5° limit

Achieve full decarbonisation of the energy system by 2035

Everything in 'Leading the Charge for a Sustainable Future'

Kosovo is Europe, Europe is Kosovo

Everything in 'Kosovo in the EU'

A new economy that works for everyone

A new economy that works for everyone

As the world's largest trading bloc, the EU owes its success to extensive economic integration, resulting in increased prosperity, stability, and overall well-being. However, the EU needs to change the way it works to face the climate, geopolitical and digital challenges we face today. Volt will modernise the EU’s framework, by focusing on innovation, taxation, and sustainability, building an economy that can effectively tackle these issues.

Support Small and Medium Enterprises

Everything in 'A new economy that works for everyone'

We are part of the European ecosystem, and yet we are allowing the natural world to deteriorate around us. Nature in the EU is in serious decline, with 80% of land and water habitats in bad condition. Volt wants to reverse this trend, revitalising biodiversity in the EU, mitigating the impacts of pollution and ensuring a better life for the animals that we share our continent with.

Everything in 'Healthy European Ecosystems'

Volt has defined 5+1 fundamental Challenges that need to be tackled in each European country and in Europe as a whole.

The 5 Challenges are basically the same for every country, but their implementation can be adapted on the national level to take into account local realities.

The +1 Challenge – our proposal to reform and strengthen the EU – is identical across all our national programmes.