Provisions on the Political
Assembly
Volt Belgium ASBL/VZW
Adopted: 15.12.2024
Volt Belgium I Page 1


Introduction
Part I. General Provisions
Article 1 - Campaign Strategy
Article 2 - Procedure for the appointment of political candidates
Article 3 - Criteria for the appointment of political candidates
Article 4 - Appointment of political candidates
Article 5 - Gender Alteration
Volt Belgium I Page 2


Introduction
The General Assembly, having regard to its powers as foreseen in Articles of Association
hereby adopts, in accordance with the Articles of Association, the following additional
Provisions on the Political Assembly which are enforceable upon all Acts and Decisions of
Organs, Effective Members, and Associate Members of the Association.
Part I. General Provisions
Article 1 - Campaign Strategy
For European, federal, and
regional parliament elections the Organ of Administration
proposes, on the basis of proposals by local and national campaign teams, the strategy to
overcome electoral thresholds, such as whether to focus on individual signature collection
from citizens or on gathering signatures from existing political parties.
Article 2 - Procedure for the appointment of political candidates
In accordance with the Articles of Association, the Electoral Commission tables in due time
a proposal for the procedure for the appointment of candidates for Regional, Federal and
European electoral lists in Belgium. The Political Assembly may then deliberate and adopt
the proposal.
The procedure for the appointment of political candidates should, when possible, take
place in the form of an election. Depending on the availability of candidates and the
availability of time, the procedure may take place, alternatively or in combination, in the
form of a nomination by the General Assembly or the respective Local Assembly.
The procedure for the appointment of political candidates should also include a clear set
of criteria for the eligibility of an individual as a political candidate for Volt.
Article 3 - Criteria for the appointment of political candidates
The criteria for the appointment of political candidates must respect the values and
principles set forth in the Code of Conduct and other governing documents of the
Association. The set of criteria may include specific requirements for candidates at the top
of the list.
Article 4 - Appointment of political candidates
In accordance with the Articles of Association, the Political Assembly may deliberate on
and nominate the candidates for European electoral lists in Belgium.
Volt Belgium I Page 3


The deliberation and appointment of political candidates for Federal,
Regional, Provincial and Municipal elections are deliberated and nominated by
the constituting assemblies based on adopted procedures by the Political Assembly or the
Local Assembly.
Article 5 - Gender Alteration
Volt lists are gender-alternating. Lists that are created in cooperation with other parties
should, when possible, be gender-alternating.
Volt Belgium I Page 4


