 
Constitution of Volt United Kingdom 
1 
 
 
VOLT UNITED KINGDOM – PARTY CONSTITUTION 
 
1. 
PARTY NAME AND PARTY OBJECTS 
 
1.1 
The Name of the party shall be Volt United Kingdom, in this document referred to as “Volt 
UK” or the “Party”. 
 
1.2 
The objectives of the Party shall be: 
 
(a) 
fight for a United Kingdom that is part of the European project; 
 
(b) 
represent British citizens’ interests in the European Union; 
 
(c) 
realise Volt Europa’s policies in the United Kingdom; and 
 
(d) 
reform politics in the United Kingdom into a progressive, solution-based, dynamic 
and tolerant process that serves everyone living in the United Kingdom. 
 
(e) 
Secure the election of Volt politicians on all legislative levels: local, regional, national 
and supra-national. 
 
2. 
OUR VISION 
 
2.1 
Volt UK stands for a Europe based on a strong political union between the European nations, 
where risks are shared and benefits reach all Europeans, and where every person has a voice. 
It stands for a Europe with a robust economy that provides opportunities for all, now and for 
future generations, a Union that is an economic powerhouse. It stands for a Europe that takes 
care of its people, where children enjoy a cleaner environment, where migration flows are 
managed together, and where rights are guaranteed and responsibilities shared. Volt UK 
stands for a truly progressive European project. 
 
3. 
CONSTITUTION OF THE PARTY 
 
3.1 
The Party is registered as a party in Great Britain. 
 
3.2 
The Party is founded as a national party but aims to – in future – be constituted by federal Volt 
chapters in England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. 
 
3.3 
The Party is constituted of individual members that may be organised in local and regional 
chapters. 
 
3.4 
The Party is organised and funded fully separate and independent of Volt Europa or any other 
foreign entity carrying the name Volt. Donations will only be accepted by Volt UK if they are 
received from a permissible source, as defined by the Political Parties, Elections and 
Referendums Act 2000 (“PPERA 2000”). 
 
4. 
EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES 
 
4.1 
Men and women and persons of other genders shall have an equal opportunity of participating 
at every level of the Party subject to the provisions of the Equality Act 2010. 
 
4.2 
All committees and boards of the Party and all candidate lists shall be comprised of 
 
(a) 
not less than 40% or, if 40% is not a whole number, the whole number nearest to but 
not exceeding 40% of those that self-identify as men or non-binary people, and self-
identify as women or non-binary people respectively; and 
 
(b) 
not less than 10% or, if 10% is not a whole number, the whole number nearest to but 
not exceeding 10% from underrepresented ethnic backgrounds; 
 


 
Constitution of Volt United Kingdom 
2 
 
(c) 
not less than 10% or, if 10% is not a whole number, the whole number nearest to but 
not exceeding 10% disabled people; and 
 
(d) 
not less than 10% or, if 10% is not a whole number, the whole number nearest to but 
not exceeding 10% from people from under-represented sexual orientations and 
gender identities, including trans and non-binary identities. 
 
4.3 
The provisions of this article 4 shall not prevent places being filled if diversity requirements 
are not met due to insufficient candidates with the stated characteristic being nominated. 
 
5. 
MEMBERSHIP 
 
5.1 
Volt UK consists of individual members, who will all have equal rights in all respects to Volt 
UK. Membership of Volt UK does not require the citizenship or residence in the United 
Kingdom. 
 
5.2 
Membership of the Party is open to everyone who agrees with the Volt UK’s objectives, vision 
and fundamental values. In accordance with article 4 above, the membership shall not be 
linked to age, ethnic origin, religion, disability, gender identity or sexual orientation. 
 
5.3 
A person applying for membership shall complete a membership form and pay the 
membership fee upon acceptance. 
 
5.4 
Conditions of membership 
 
(a) 
Membership shall not be open to persons that are members of another political party 
or support movements, associations or individuals that pursue goals contravening the 
policies, objectives and the vision of Volt UK. Membership of other political parties 
of movements should be provided by candidate members upon application, and any 
changes during their membership should be reported. 
 
(b) 
Every member of Volt UK pledges to treat others with respect and not to harass, or 
intimidate any other Party member, volunteer, or member of the public. 
 
(c) 
Every member of Volt UK must abide by the Volt Europa’s data protection rules as 
laid out in Volt Europa’s Data Protection Notice as published on www.volteuropa.org. 
 
5.5 
Members of other Volt chapters can become a member of Volt UK so long as they do not 
possess more than one other Volt chapter membership. 
 
5.6 
Membership Fee 
 
(a) 
Only members who have paid their applicable membership fees are eligible to act 
upon their membership rights, including the right to vote at meetings and assemblies 
of Volt UK. 
 
(b) 
All members that are older than 19 years of age shall pay an annual membership fee. 
 
(c) 
Each Member can choose to pay one of the following annual membership fee amounts 
 
(i) 
Highly discounted membership fee of GBP 10; or 
 
(ii) 
Reduced rate membership fee of GBP 25; or 
 
(iii) 
Standard rate membership fee of GBP 50; or 
 
(iv) 
Elevated rate membership fee of GBP 100. 
 
(d) 
The membership fee levels are subject to review and can be changed at the beginning 
of the year as decided by the Executive Board. 
 


 
Constitution of Volt United Kingdom 
3 
 
 
5.7 
Membership revocation 
 
(a) 
Volt UK can revoke the membership of an individual if the individual has not paid 
two consecutive payments of the annual membership fee, if the member does not 
continue to meet the conditions of membership, or if a member engages in conduct 
that is grossly detrimental to the Party. 
 
(b) 
Any revocation of membership shall be decided by a majority decision of the 
Executive Board. 
 
5.8 
Volt UK will maintain a membership register of all members. 
 
6. 
PARTY ASSEMBLIES 
 
6.1 
Volt UK will hold at least two (2) general assemblies each calendar year. 
 
6.2 
Any member of the Executive Board or Committee can call for a vote at an Executive Board 
meeting on holding a general assembly, which will be approved through majority vote by the 
Executive Board 
 
6.3 
All members of Volt UK shall be invited to attend the general assemblies as delegates. 
Invitations shall be sent and published two weeks before the general assembly. 
 
6.4 
Supporters of Volt UK, members of other Volt chapters as well as other invitees can 
participate as observers without voting rights. Membership can also be obtained prior to or at 
the general assembly. 
 
6.5 
Delegates shall pay a delegation fee for participation in the general assembly as specified in 
the invitation. Volt UK will provide access for those members who cannot afford to pay the 
delegation fee. 
 
6.6 
The Executive Board shall present the agenda of a party assembly at least one week before the 
assembly, such agenda might include but is not limited to: 
 
(a) 
A report by the members of the Executive Committee; 
 
(b) 
The programme for Volt UK for the following 6 months as well as decisions on 
policy; 
 
(c) 
Report on the finances of the Party; 
 
(d) 
Elections of candidates; 
 
(e) 
Elections of members of the Executive Board; 
 
(f) 
Presentation and approval of the Executive Committee; 
 
(g) 
Approval of the Nominating Officer; 
 
(h) 
Motions to change the Programme of the Party, the policies of the Party, and this 
Constitution. 
 
6.7 
Delegates of the general assembly shall elect a chair of the general assembly at the start of the 
assembly. 
 
6.8 
Debates and Motions at general assemblies. 
 
(a) 
Any member may introduce a motion to the chair of the general assembly if it is 
supported by at least one other member. 
 


 
Constitution of Volt United Kingdom 
4 
 
(b) 
Amendments to motions or amendments to policy decisions may be submitted in the 
same way. 
 
(c) 
The chair makes the ultimate decision whether to entertain any such motion. 
 
(d) 
Each motion requires at least half the voting members present voting in favour of the 
motion. 
 
6.9 
Voting at Party Assemblies 
 
(a) 
Any voting process at a general assembly shall be overseen by the Nominating 
Officer of Volt UK. 
 
(b) 
Voting at general assemblies shall be by show of hands, unless a secret vote is 
requested by at least 10% of the members present at the general assembly. 
 
(c) 
Each constituting member of the Party and each member, who has been a member of 
the Party for at least three months, has one vote. 
 
(d) 
Members who cannot attend the general assembly may appoint another member of 
Volt UK who is in attendance as their proxy. Any proxy vote must be declared at the 
beginning of the general assembly and appropriate evidence of such proxy shall be 
presented to the Nominating Officer. 
 
(e) 
If technically feasible, electronic voting shall be made available for members that 
cannot attend the general assembly in person. 
 
6.10 
Any decisions taken at a party assembly will be recorded in Volt UK’s decision book. The 
decision book shall be open to all Members for inspection. 
 
7. 
RULE AND DECISION BOOK 
 
7.1 
Volt UK will keep a rule book and a decision book. 
 
7.2 
The rule book shall contain internal rules and regulations necessary for the organisation and 
functioning of the Party required in addition to this Constitution. 
 
7.3 
The decision book shall record all decisions made during any Party assembly. 
 
7.4 
Both rule book and decision book shall be kept up to date by the Co-Leads of Volt UK. 
 
7.5 
Any member of Volt UK shall have the right to access the rule book and the decision upon 
request and within a reasonable period not exceeding one (1) week. 
 
7.6 
The rule and decision book will include the Volt UK Code of Conduct and Social Media 
Rules, which shall be regularly updated, with any change having to be approved by both the 
Executive Board and the Arbitration Committee. The Code of Conduct and Social Media 
Rules document will be available to all members on the Volt UK website. 
 
8. 
CHANGES TO THIS CONSTITUTION 
 
8.1 
Changes to this constitution can be made at a general assembly. 
 
8.2 
Proposals for change can be initiated by the Executive Board or by any member of Volt UK 
who is supported by at least another two members of Volt UK. 
 
8.3 
Changes to the constitution must receive approval by at least two thirds (2/3) of the voting 
members 
 
 
 


 
Constitution of Volt United Kingdom 
5 
 
9. 
EXECUTIVE BOARD 
 
9.1 
The Executive Board of Volt UK shall consist of: 
 
(a) 
Two (2) Co-Leads of Volt UK – of two different gender identities –, one of whom 
shall act as chair and one of whom shall ensure regional representation; 
 
(b) 
Campaign Officer, who shall be responsible for Volt UK to run in elections; and 
 
(c) 
Treasurer. 
9.2 
The Co-Leads of Volt UK shall be the joint chair of the Executive Board and are responsible 
for the strategy of the Volt UK and for executing decisions by Volt Europa. 
 
9.3 
One of the Co-Leads of Volt UK shall be selected to be responsible for all local chapters of 
Volt UK and for ensuring the adherence to this constitution. 
 
9.4 
The Campaign Officer is responsible for enrolling Volt in elections, organising the campaigns 
for such elections and reporting the campaign expenditure to the Electoral Commission. 
 
9.5 
The Treasurer is responsible for the budget of Volt UK and for fund-raising. 
 
9.6 
Election of the Executive Board 
 
(a) 
Nominees for a position at the Executive Board must be members of Volt UK. 
 
(b) 
Nominees must be nominated by one member of Volt UK with the support of a 
second member of Volt UK. 
 
(c) 
The Nominating Officer shall determine the deadline for nominations and request the 
nominees to state whether they accept their nomination before the election. 
 
(d) 
Each of the Co-Leads, the Campaign Officer and the Treasurer shall be elected 
separately. 
 
(e) 
Voting for one or more members of the Executive Board shall take place at a general 
assembly in accordance with article 6.8 above. A member of the Executive board 
shall be elected by a majority of the voting members. 
 
(f) 
There is no limit on re-election to the Executive Board. 
 
(g) 
The result shall be recorded and published as soon as possible after but not later than 
24 hours after the election. 
 
(h) 
Nominees cannot be a member of another political party, unless it is another Volt 
Europa chapter. 
 
(i) 
Upon election there will be a one (1) month handover period. If the Nominee is 
elected to an unfilled position, there will be no handover period. 
 
9.7 
The Executive Board shall be elected for a term of two (2) years. 
 
9.8 
Removal of an Executive Board member  
 
(a) 
Any member of the Executive Board can be removed at a Party assembly by at least 
two thirds (2/3) of the voting members. 
 
(b) 
The Executive Board can remove another member of the Board through majority vote 
for behaviour detrimental to the values of Volt UK, including, but not limited to, 
those outlined in 5.7a. 
 


 
Constitution of Volt United Kingdom 
6 
 
 
(c) 
A removed Executive Board member can appeal for the decision to be revoked 
through a vote at a general assembly, or via Volt UK’s Arbitration Committee 
 
9.9 
The Executive Board shall meet at least six times each calendar year. 
 
9.10 
The Executive Board shall appoint a Nominating Officer for the purposes of the Political 
Parties, Elections and Referendums Act 2000. 
 
9.11 
All members of the Executive Board and Committee shall pledge to uphold the Volt UK Code 
of Conduct and Social Media Rules. 
 
10. 
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 
 
10.1 
The Executive Board shall appoint the Executive Committee of Volt UK by majority for a 
period of two (2) years. 
 
10.2 
The Executive Board can determine the number of members on the Executive Committee as 
well as descriptions and names of their roles. 
 
10.3 
Members of the Executive Committee must be members of Volt UK. 
 
10.4 
The Executive Board may revoke the assignment of any member of the Executive Committee 
at any time by majority. 
 
10.5 
A motion to revoke the appointment of any member of the Executive Committee can be 
presented at a general assembly in accordance with article 6.7 above. 
 
11. 
NOMINATING OFFICER 
 
11.1 
The Nominating Officer shall be appointed for a period of two (2) years. 
 
11.2 
The appointment may be approved by the following general assembly in accordance with 
article 6.7 . 
 
11.3 
The Nominating Officer shall be neutral. 
 
12. 
ARBITRATION COMMITTEE 
 
12.1 
The Arbitration Committee of Volt UK shall consist of at least three (3) members, appointed 
for a period of two (2) years. The number of members must always be an uneven/odd number. 
 
12.2 
Election of Arbitration Committee members. 
 
(a) Arbitration Committee candidates can be voted into the committee at an election during a 
general assembly. 
 
(b) The Executive Board can appoint individuals to the Arbitration Committee if there are 
unfilled positions, either due to a lack of candidates at a general assembly, or due to a 
position being vacated prior to the end of a member’s two (2) year term. 
 
12.3 
Members of the Arbitration Committee do not have to be members of Volt UK. 
 
12.4 
The task of the Arbitration Committee is to hear any appeal that involves mediation, conflict 
resolution, grievances and complaints between, and against, current and former members of 
Volt UK, including members of the Executive Board, Executive Committee and elected public 
officials. 
 
12.5 
The Arbitration Committee has the powers to revoke or reinstate Volt UK, Executive Board 
and Executive Committee memberships. 
 
12.6 
The outcome of any appeal can be revoked through a general assembly majority vote. 
 


 
Constitution of Volt United Kingdom 
7 
 
12.7 
Arbitration Committee members shall, upon hearing an appeal, make a decision that upholds 
the Volt UK Party Constitution and values of the Volt Europa movement.  
 
12.8 
If the appeal involves a member of the Arbitration Committee, said member will recuse 
themselves from hearing the appeal. 
 
12.9 
Arbitration Committee members cannot simultaneously with their position be members of the 
Volt UK Executive Board or Executive Committee.  
 
CANDIDATES FOR ELECTED PUBLIC OFFICE 
 
13.1 
All individual eligible members of the Party with continuous membership of at least six (6) 
months (who reside in the electoral area concerned) are entitled to participate in selections. 
Any exceptions to this must be approved by the Executive Board. 
 
13.2 
Volt UK aims to stand candidates, in local, regional, the General Elections and the elections to 
the European Parliament. 
 
13.3 
Any member of Volt UK can nominate any other member of Volt UK to the Nominating 
Officer to be selected as a candidate to stand in an election for Volt UK. 
 
13.4 
All nominees shall undertake in writing, in a form stipulated by the Executive Committee, if 
selected, to abide by the Volt UK programme, its rules and standing orders. 
 
13.5 
Selections of candidates may be conducted at a Party assembly or through online voting, if 
feasible and required. Adequate notice of the commencement of the selection process must be 
given to all Members of Volt UK. 
 
13.6 
Selection processes must enable the inclusion and involvement of all members on an equal 
basis and take into account the barriers to participation which underrepresented groups may 
face. A system will be put in place to secure adequate representation of groups having 
protected characteristics within the meaning of the Equalities Act 2010. 
 
13.7 
In the selection process, each member of Volt UK shall have one vote for the selection of 
candidates. 
 
13.8 
The Co-Leads of Volt UK jointly may carry one casting vote, if required in the selection 
process. The vote has to be supported by both Co-Leads. 
 
13.9 
After being selected, each nominee shall declare their intention to run for Volt UK. 
 
13.10 The Executive Board can remove a selected candidate from Volt UK’s candidate list if 
the candidate engages in conduct that contradicts Volt UK’s programme, vision or 
policies and/or might be grossly detrimental to the Party. 
 
13.11 All candidates standing for public office as well as elected officials pledge to uphold the Volt 
UK Code of Conduct and Social Media Rules. 
 
13. 
VOLT UK’S FINANCIAL SCHEME 
 
14.1 
Volt UK shall maintain a financial scheme approved by the Electoral Commission and shall 
consist of a central accounting unit for Volt UK overseen by the Treasurer. 
 
14.2 
The Financial Year for Volt UK shall be 1 January to 31 December. 
 
14.3 
Volt United Kingdom is operating financially independent of Volt Europa, which is another 
legal entity. Both entities will conduct their financial affairs fully separate. 
 
14.4 
Donations are only accepted from permissible sources as defined by PPERA 2000. Volt UK 
will check whether the source for all donations exceeding GBP 500 is permissible. 
 
14.5 
Any donations from impermissible sources will be returned within 30 days. 


 
Constitution of Volt United Kingdom 
8 
 
 
14.6 
Volt United Kingdom will not accept any donations from Volt Europa or on Volt Europa’s 
behalf. 
 
14.7 
Volt United Kingdom may assist Volt Europa in collecting donations from third parties, when 
such third parties would like to donate money to Volt Europa but get in touch with Volt UK or 
use Volt UK’s website to arrange for any donation. Volt UK will not accept any of those 
donations for Volt United Kingdom and will not take any such monies into Volt UK’s 
account but will merely facilitate the flow of information so that the third party is able to 
make the desired donation. 
14.8 
Volt United Kingdom will not accept any loan from Volt Europa or another foreign entity 
associated with Volt Europa. 
 
14.9 
Accounting will be conducted in accordance with PPERA 2000 and will maintain adequate 
financial records, identify and report donations and loans, produce an annual statement of 
accounts by the end of the first quarter of the following year and provide all relevant 
information as requested to the Party. 
 
14. 
DISSOLUTION OF THE PARTY 
 
15.1 
A motion to dissolve Volt UK can be introduced by the Executive Board or by 50% of the 
voting members present at a general assembly. 
 
15.2 
The motion to dissolve Volt UK requires 50% of all members of Volt UK to vote in favour. 
 
15.3 
If the Party is dissolved by more than 50% of its members, the Executive Board shall appoint 
one member of the group that introduced the motion to dissolve Volt UK as an administrator 
who is responsible to orderly dissolve the Party. 
 
