Financial Provisions
Volt Belgium ASBL/VZW
Adopted: 15.12.2024
Volt Belgium I Page 1


Part I. Membership
Article Pr1 - Membership Fees
Article 2 - Payment Procedure (Arts 8, 14 of the Statutes)
Part II. Accounts and Oversight
Article 3 - Financial oversight by the the Treasurer
Article 4 - Access of Members to the financial accounts
Part III. Budget and Funds
Article 5 - Process for Establishing a national and local budgets
Article 6 - Procedure for requesting financial resources from Volt Belgium
Article 7 - Use by Local Assemblies of Volt Belgium funds
Article 8 - Affectation of local fundraising results and proceeds
Volt Belgium I Page 2


Part I. Membership
Article 1 - Membership Fees
Membership dues are paid on an annual basis. The applicable membership due are as
follows:
- Lower income: 1€/month or 12€/year, recommended for individuals with a total
net income below 2000€/month (e.g. students, unemployed, pensioners).
- Medium income: 5€/month or 60€/year, recommended for individuals with a total
net income between 2000€/month and 4000€/month.
- Higher income: minimum 10€/month or 120€/year or higher, recommended for
individuals with a total net income above 4000€/month.
Members place themselves in one of the categories, based on their own assessment of
their income situation. Members may always contribute more than their membership due,
these shall be registered as donations to the Association and kept in the register of
donations and marked accordingly in the accounts of the Association.
In accordance with the Articles of Association, an Effective Member may write to the
Treasurer requesting support from the Membership Support Fund who must present the
request to the Organ of Administration. The Association may, on the basis of available
funds and selection criteria established by the Organ of Administration and subject to
Organ
of Administration’s approval, offer to provide a scholarship covering the
membership due for a calendar year. Such support is always discretionary.
In accordance with the Articles of Association, an Effective Member may write to the
Organ of Administration requesting an alternative form of payment who must present the
request to the Organ of Administration. The Association may, on the basis of selection
criteria
established
by
the
Organ
of
Administration
and
subject
to
Organ
of
Administration’s approval, agree to an alternative form of payment (for example
volunteering time above and beyond that expected of a normal volunteer). Such support is
always discretionary.
Article 2 - Payment Procedure
A request for payment of membership dues must be issued by a representative of the
Organ of Administration or its intermediary at least by electronic means. The request for
payment shall contain all necessary banking information for the Member to make the
payment and shall recall the amounts agreed by the General Assembly.
Volt Belgium I Page 3


The request for payment shall also notify the due date and include all other information
required by Belgian legal provisions. A representative of the Organ of Administration or its
intermediary must send a reminder in the event of non-payment by the due date.
Payment must be received within the month of the dispatch date of the second
notification and an additional grace period of seven (7) working days shall apply before the
Organs of the Association are authorised to consider the individual concerned as resigning.
Volt Belgium I Page 4


Part II. Accounts and Oversight
Article 3 - Financial oversight by the the Treasurer
The Treasurer and members of staff tasked with financial operations have the delegated
power to make financial acquisitions within the determined scope issued by the Organ of
Administration for the day-to-day operations of the party, in reference to Articles of
Association.
The Treasurer must account that expenditures are made in accordance with the Budget at
national and local level, and that appropriate record keeping of all financial transactions
including receipts, invoices, purchase requests and orders, is accomplished within the
aforementioned scope and in accordance with Belgian legal and fiscal provisions and laws.
Article 4 - Access of Members to the financial accounts
Effective Members must have access to all past annual financial accounts and can request
information on the state of income/expenditure at any time. Access of Members to the
financial accounts is the responsibility of the Treasurer supported by the Organ of
Administration and budget holders.
Volt Belgium I Page 5


Part III. Budget and Funds
Article 5 - Process for Establishing national and local budgets
The Treasurer, together with the Organ of Administration, works with all Organs of the
Association to establish a national and local budget for each Local Assembly. The Budget
ensures a fair and proportionate distribution of resources between the national and local
Organs. To achieve this, Local Assemblies must provide a proposed budget to the
Treasurer approximately 3 months before the General Assembly. The Treasurer works with
the national leads to establish a corresponding national budget capturing national-level
actions. The Treasurer together with the Organ of Administration finalises the national
budget and puts it forward to the General Assembly to approve.
Once the General Assembly adopts the budget, it is binding on all Organs of the
Association which must ensure that any expenditures are in accordance with the budget.
In the event of unforeseen donations, the treasurer together with the Organ of
Administration can decide to make additional expenses that exceed the budget.
Article 6 - Procedure for requesting financial resources from Volt
Belgium
When Functional Leads and City Leads require financial resources they can submit a
request to the Organ of Administration or the Treasurer depending on the amount
requested. The amount (or projection of costs) and purpose of the funds must be detailed
within the request in the form of a purchase request. The Treasurer or Organ of
Administration will then deliberate and if accepted, allocate the financial resources
expected to meet the request’s purpose, this may or may not be equivalent to the sum
initially requested. Functional and City Leadership may make appeals against rejection of
financial resources to the Organ of Administration.
Article 7 - Use by Local Assemblies of Volt Belgium funds
In accordance with Articles of Association, Local Assemblies have financial competence for
their geographical or social area within the means and medium set forth by the Treasurer,
the Organ of Administration and the Provincial Council. Local Assemblies and their teams
receive a quota of the membership fees of Effective Members in their jurisdiction. This
quota shall not be under forty percent (40%) and is calculated based on the average
membership fees collected by Volt Belgium in the current year, or as otherwise defined by
the General Assembly on the basis of a proposal from the Organ of Administration. This
proportion from the national treasury may be allocated to the Local Assembly budget for
that year.
Volt Belgium I Page 6


Article 8 - Affectation of local fundraising results and proceeds
Local Assemblies are authorised to seek fundraising to boost their local operating
capacities. Local fundraising shall be allocated to the appropriate budget lines on an
established ratio of sixty percent (60%) for the Local Assembly and forty (40%) for the
national budget, a ratio which can be modified by the General Assembly on the basis of a
proposal by the Treasurer together with the Organ of Administration. The Local Assembly
must always respect Belgian legal provisions particularly as regards campaigning financing
when doing so.
The Treasurer and the Organ of Administration together with the Provincial Council
establish standard operating principles, banking and accounting infrastructures to
facilitate a practical and speedy disbursement of funds in compliance with Belgian legal
provisions, national and local budget limitations set by the General Assembly, financial
accountability and transparency.
Volt Belgium I Page 7


