Articles of Association
Volt Belgium ASBL/VZW
Adopted: 15.12.2024
Volt Belgium I Page 1


Part I. The Association
Article 1 - Name, legal form, logo
Article 2 - Seat and registered office
Article 3 - Purpose and Activities
Article 4 - Duration
Article 5 - Dissolution
Part II. Membership of The Association
Article 6 - Categories of members
Article 7 - Effective Members
Article 8 - Associate Members
Article 9 - Membership Fees
Article 10 - Resignation of a Member
Article 11 - Suspension of a Member
Article 12 - Exclusion of a Member
Article 13 - Rights to the Assets of the Association
Article 14 - Register of Effective Members
Part III. Organs of The Association
Article 15 - The General Assembly
Article 16 - The Political Assembly
Article 17 - Local Assemblies
Article 18 - The Organ of Administration
Article 19 - The Provincial Council
Article 20 - The Electoral Commission
Article 21 - The Arbitration Commission
Part IV. Governance Documents of The Association
Article 22 - Amendments of the Articles of Association
Article 23 - Code of Conduct
Article 24 - Rules of Procedure of the Association
Article 25 - Rules of Procedure of the Political Assembly
Article 26 - Financial Provisions
Article 27 - Legal reference
Part V. Financial and operational oversight, and regulatory compliance
Article 28 - Budget
Article 29 - Annual work plan
Article 30 - Annual report
Article 31 - Financial report and Annual Accounts
Volt Belgium I Page 2


Part I. The Association
Article 1 - Name, legal form, logo
The name of the association (Association) is "Volt België - Belgique - Belgien", or in its
shortened form "Volt Belgium".
The Association has the status of a non-profit association (in Dutch “vereniging zonder
winstoogmerk“, or in French “Association Sans But Lucratif”, or in German “Vereinigung
ohne Erwerbszweck“) and it is governed by the Belgian Code of Companies and
Associations (in these Articles of Association further on referred to as the “Code”).
All published materials and electronic communications of the Association must always be
preceded or followed immediately in Dutch by “vereniging zonder winstoogmerk“ or the
initials “vzw,” or in French by “Association Sans But Lucratif” or the initials “ASBL,” or in
German by “Vereinigung ohne Erwerbszweck“ or the initials “VoE.“
Article 2 - Seat and registered office
The seat and registered office of the Association is located in the Brussels Capital Region.
The seat and registered office of the Association may be relocated to another premise
only by agreement of the General Assembly on proposal of the Organ of Administration of
the Association and in accordance with applicable legal provisions.
Article 3 - Purpose and Activities
The Association is created in order to pursue the objectives of the transnational and
pan-European political movement Volt Europa, based on the Volt Charter of Volt Europa.
The Association is or takes the necessary steps to be a Member Association of Volt Europa.
The Association observes the values on which the European Union is founded, as
expressed in Article 2 of the Treaty on European Union, namely respect for human dignity,
freedom, democracy, equality, the rule of law and respect for human rights, including the
rights of persons belonging to minorities.
The Association may, inter-alia, carry out the following activities in order to achieve its
purpose including:
(a) Through its Organ of Administration, represent the Volt movement in Belgium in all
legal proceedings;
(b) Establish, support and promote local assemblies of Volt in Belgium including
through activities at the local, provincial and regional level in collaboration with
Volt Europa, its Member and Associated Member Associations, and its members;
Volt Belgium I Page 3


(c) Ensure the effective financial and operational oversight and regulatory compliance
of the movement, the Association, and the electoral lists of Volt in Belgium;
(d) Ensure the operational efficiency of the Volt movement in Belgium by:
(i) facilitating, supporting, and coordinating the operation of all Members across all
functions and ensuring coherence of the organisational structures;
(ii) assisting Members in promoting the Volt movement and running for elections in
Belgium; and
(iii) providing supplemental training for Members alone or in collaboration with
Volt Europa.
The Association may carry out all acts directly or indirectly related to the achievement of
its purpose and activities. To that end, it may buy, sell, take on lease and let out, possess all
movable and immovable property and facilities, mortgage the same, accept inter vivos and
testamentary gifts subject to the authorisations foreseen by applicable legal provisions.
Article 4 - Duration
The Association is created for an unlimited duration.
Article 5 - Dissolution
In accordance with Belgian legal provisions, the General Assembly must meet a quorum of
at least two-thirds (2/3) of the Effective Members validly listed in the Register of Effective
Members on the date the General Assembly convocation was published to validly take a
decision to dissolve the Association. If such a quorum has not been reached, the General
Assembly may be convened at earliest 15 days after the failed General Assembly and no
quorum is then required.
In accordance with Belgian legal provisions, the Association may be dissolved at any time
by decision with a four-fifths (4/5) majority of the Effective Members present and
represented (by procuration) or voting electronically if foreseen by the Electoral
Commission.
In the event of dissolution of the Association, for whatever reason, the liquidation shall be
carried out by one or more liquidators who shall perform their duties, either by virtue of a
resolution by the General Assembly, or, in the absence thereof, by Court decision that may
be initiated by any interested party, the allocation of the possible net assets after
liquidation shall be determined by the General Assembly, or, in the absence thereof, by the
liquidators. This asset will have to be allocated for a disinterested purpose as close as
possible to the purpose of the Association as described in these present Articles of
Association.
Volt Belgium I Page 4


Part II. Membership of The Association
Article 6 - Categories of members
The Association is constituted of Effective Members (with full voting rights), and Associate
Members (with limited voting rights). The number of Effective Members may never be
inferior to three (3). Effective Members benefit from the full rights and privileges
accorded to them by applicable legal provisions and these present Articles of Association.
Associate Members only benefit from the rights and privileges explicitly afforded to them
by these present Articles of Association. Members shall not be liable for any commitments
entered into by the Association.
Without prejudice to the Powers of the General Assembly to amend these Articles of
Association and Rules of Procedure of the Association, the Organ of Administration of the
Association has the authority, subject to approval of the Provincial Council, to establish
and define additional membership types should the need be felt, and in such cases, to
publish the rights and obligations with regards to these categories of membership.
Article 7 - Effective Members
a)
Eligibility and Admission
An Effective Member is any natural person having fulfilled the following eligibility
criteria set forth in these Articles of Association:
i)
Is a resident of Belgium; or is a Belgian national living outside of Belgium;
ii)
Has reached the age of majority; or produces a letter of permission from a
legal guardian if under the age of majority;
iii)
Has completed successfully the admission procedure for Effective Membership
notified by a decision of the Organ of Administration provided within three (3)
months of the application being submitted as determined by these present
Articles of Association and further specified in the Rules of Procedure of the
Association;
iv)
Has formally undersigned these Articles of Association, the Code of Conduct,
and the Rules of Procedure of the Association;
v)
Is not a Member of another Association whose values conflict with Volt’s
Articles of Association or its Code of Conduct;
vi)
Has paid the full membership fees in a timely fashion to benefit from their
rights, or meets the requirements for alternative payment of membership fees,
Volt Belgium I Page 5


or benefits from an exemption from membership fee as foreseen in the Rules
of Procedure of the Association.
b)
Rights and Responsibilities
All Effective Members benefit from a right to vote at the General Assembly, and
their respective Local Assemblies should they exist. They have further rights and
duties as determined by these present Articles of Association, Code of Conduct and
Rules of Procedure of the Association.
All Effective Members may be represented by one (1) other Effective Member to
whom they may give their written proxy during a General Assembly in accordance
with the Rules of Procedure of the Association, and should digital voting facilities
not be provided by virtue of a decision by the Electoral Commission. An Effective
Member may not hold more than two (2) proxies.
In the event of proxy voting, the Electoral Commission shall be responsible for
providing a form to Effective Members wishing to be represented to be filled and
returned to the Electoral Commission prior to the General Assembly and in
accordance with the Rules of Procedure of the Association.
Decisions are taken by a simple majority of the votes present and represented,
unless otherwise foreseen by applicable legal provisions or by the present Articles of
Association. In the event of a tie, the vote of the Chair of the General Assembly or
their replacement is the casting vote.
If an Effective Member has multiple residencies, or prefers to be allocated to a Local
Assembly outside of their area of residence for whatever reason, they must inform
the Organ of Administration of their political residence and may not change that
political residence for a period of one (1) year except if they move to this residence.
Article 8 - Associate Members
a)
Eligibility and Admission
An Associate Member (also called Suporter) is any natural person who volunteers or
supports the object of the Association and the Party of Volt Belgium, having fulfilled
the following eligibility criteria set forth in these Articles of Association:
i)
Is a resident of Belgium; or is a Belgian national living outside of Belgium;
ii)
Has reached the age of majority; or produces a letter of permission from a
legal guardian if under the age of majority;
iii)
Has
completed
successfully
the
admission
procedure
for
Associate
Membership notified by a decision of the Organ of Administration provided
Volt Belgium I Page 6


within three (3) months of the application being submitted and as further
determined by these present Articles of Association and further specified in
the Rules of Procedure of the Association;
iv)
Has formally undersigned these Articles of Association, the Code of Conduct,
and the Rules of Procedure of the Association;
v)
Is not a Member of another Association whose values conflict with Volt’s
Articles of Association or its Code of Conduct;
vi)
Participates in Volt proceedings at their own costs but are not expected to pay
any membership fees foreseen for Effective Members.
b)
Rights and Responsibilities
All Associate Members benefit from a right of presence at the General Assembly but
no voting rights. All Associate Members benefit from a right of presence in their
respective Local Assembly and may, at the full discretion of the applicable Local
Assembly, benefit from voting rights for Local Assembly proceedings. Associate
Members are not eligible to run for any position in any Organ of the Association.
Associate Members may not be represented by other natural persons or Effective
Members in Local Assembly votes.
If an Associate Member has multiple residencies, or prefers to be allocated to a Local
Assembly outside of their area of residence for whatever reason, they must inform
the Organ of Administration of their political residence and may not change that
political residence for a period of one (1) year except if they move to this residence.
Article 9 - Membership Fees
The Association may establish membership fees to help support the operating costs of the
Association. Members may be charged a recurring membership fee following a proposal by
the Organ of Administration of the Association and approval, by simple majority, of the
General Assembly.
The membership fees for Members may be differentiated on the basis of motivated
criteria (for example income levels). The maximum amount that the association may
charge its members is 1200€ per financial year.
Unless otherwise defined in the Financial provisions or decided by the General Assembly,
the applicable fees shall remain the same as in the precedent year.
Further provisions on membership fees may be defined in the Financial Provisions of the
Association.
Volt Belgium I Page 7


Article 10 - Resignation of a Member
a)
Any Effective or Associate Member may leave, of their own free-will, the Association
by addressing in writing their resignation either to the Organ of Administration of
the Association, or a member of staff in charge with human resources related
matters. Resignation does not remove the obligations of a resigning effective
member to pay any remaining membership fees or other charges.
b)
It is also reputed as resigning any Effective or Associate Member who has not paid
membership fees within the month of receiving a reminder through at least two
means of personal communication.
c)
On the occasion of a member's death, the Member is considered to have resigned.
Article 11 - Suspension of a Member
a)
The Organ of Administration of the Association on the basis of Member’s failure to
pay the membership fees may suspend the voting rights and mandates of any
Effective or Associate Member. The Organ of Administration must terminate the
suspension within a week of the payment in full of the membership fees by the
Member. Such suspension may be appealed to and terminated by the Arbitration
Commission sitting in full chamber.
b)
The Arbitration Commission on the basis of a majority decision by the Arbitration
Commission sitting in full chamber, may suspend the voting rights and mandates of
any Effective or Associate Member having been found in breach of these Statutes,
the Code of Conduct, the Rules of Procedure of the Association or applicable Belgian
legal provisions. Such suspension may be appealed to and terminated by the
Arbitration Commission sitting in full chamber.
Article 12 - Exclusion of a Member
The exclusion of an Effective or Associate Member, may only be decided by the General
Assembly on the basis of a two-third (2/3rd) majority of the votes present and
represented. Such an agenda item may only be added to the General Assembly by the
Arbitration Commission in accordance with the Rules of Procedure of the Association. The
exclusion of an Effective or Associate Member must adhere to the conditions outlined in
the Rules of Procedure of the Association, and if it concerns a natural person, a secret
ballot vote must be organised by the Electoral Commission.
The steps for the exclusion of a member consist of:
a)
A convocation of a General Assembly in accordance with the requirements set forth
in these present Articles of Association;
Volt Belgium I Page 8


b)
The mention in the Agenda of the General Assembly the proposal to exclude with a
summary description of the reason for said proposal;
c)
A brief presentation of the conclusions of the Arbitration Commission by its
presiding Chair or Co-Chairs;
d)
The respect of the right to defence, the Member whose exclusion is requested may
address, should the Member wish, the General Assembly;
e)
In the case of an Effective Member, a mention is added to the Register of Members
with regards to the exclusion of the Effective Member.
Article 13 - Rights to the Assets of the Association
Members who resigned, are suspended or were excluded, as well as their successors shall
have no rights whatsoever on the assets of the Association and shall not be entitled to
claim any reimbursement of any nature whatsoever, unless otherwise foreseen in these
present Articles of Association or the Rules of Procedure of the Association.
Article 14 - Register of Effective Members
In accordance with Belgian legal provisions, the Association maintains a digital and physical
register (at its registered office) of Effective Members under the responsibility of the
Organ of Administration supported by any member of staff in charge of human resources.
All decisions of admission, resignation, or exclusion of an Effective Member must be
registered by the Organ of Administration within eight (8) days of the Organ of
Administration or General Assembly in which the decisions were taken.
Volt Belgium I Page 9


Part III. Organs of The Association
Article 15 - The General Assembly
§1 Purpose
The General Assembly is the highest organ of the Association. The General Assembly
decides on all aspects of the Association, unless otherwise stated in these Articles of
Association, Code of Conduct, the Rules of Procedure of the Association, other
governance documents of the Association or Belgian legal provisions.
§2 Composition
The General Assembly is composed of all Effective Members and is presided by a Session
Chair (or their Substitute) appointed by the Organ of Administration. Associate Members
may be invited to attend the General Assembly.
§3 Occurrence
In accordance with Belgian legal provisions, the General Assembly meets at least once a
year within 6 months of the closing of the financial year. At this meeting, the discharge and
election for all lapsed mandates relating to the Organs of the Association, the
independent assessors/auditors for the accounts are held.
The General Assembly meets in a physical location within the Territories of Belgium but
may also, should the need be felt and as determined by the Organ of Administration,
exceptionally be held virtually on a platform which can be accessed by all Effective
Members.
The exact date and time of a General Assembly is communicated by the Organ of
Administration and must be included in the formal convocation addressed to all Members.
The General Assembly may be convocated more frequently if the interests of the
Association so require. This may be done at the request of the Organ of Administration on
the basis of a minuted decision of at least half of the Administrators, the Provincial Council
on the basis of a minuted unanimous decision, or by the Effective Members on the basis of
a co-signed written request, addressed to the Organ of Administration, representing at
least one hundred (100) Effective Members or one-twentieth (1/20) of the Effective
Members on the basis of the Register of the Members of the date upon which the written
request is submitted. In the event that the co-signatories do not represent the required
number of Effective Members, the Organ of Administration must notify a refusal to hold a
General Assembly on that basis within seven (7) days. Failing this notification, a General
Assembly must be held.
Volt Belgium I Page 10


§4 Competence
The General Assembly has the exclusive competence for:
i)
Amendments to the Articles of Association, the Code of Conduct, the Rules of
Procedure of the Association as well as other governance documents adopted
by the General Assembly;
ii)
The election, appointment, and dismissal of all mandates relating to the
Organs of the Association, and independent assessors and auditors for the
accounts, with the exception of those appointed by a Local Assembly. It may
delegate to the Electoral Commission the conducting of elections and the
counting of voting results in accordance with these present Articles of
Association and the Rules of Procedure of the Association;
iii)
The determination of remuneration if any for the mandates pertaining to the
organs of the association;
iv)
The discharge of individuals holding a mandate referenced pertaining to the
organs of the association;
v)
The introduction in Court of an action against either the administrators or the
assessors;
vi)
The approval of the annual accounts, budget, financial reports, and annual
work plan;
vii)
The dissolution of the Association;
viii)
The exclusion of Members;
ix)
The modification of the Purpose of the Association or its legal structure;
x)
And any other Acts where it is explicitly granted competence by these present
Articles of Association, the Code of Conduct, or Rules of Procedure of the
Association or Belgian legal provisions.
§5 Convocation
All Effective Members and Associate Members are notified of ordinary General Assemblies
by the Organ of Administration. The publication of the notification must be done by
publication on the Volt Workplace instance or equivalent, and where practicable also by
email and other digital communication means at least fifteen (15) days prior to the General
Assembly date. The notification must contain the date, the time, and location of the
General Assembly, applicable procuration forms, and virtual voting modalities if these are
offered.
Volt Belgium I Page 11


Any proposal for new agenda items co-signed by at least one-twentieth (1/20) of the
Effective Members, addressed to the Organ of Administration, or the Co-Presidents of the
Association, must also be added to the agenda and notified. Following the addition of
member proposed agenda items, no additional substantive modifications to the agenda
may be undertaken six (6) days prior to the General Assembly being held. The General
Assembly may not vote upon matters which were not notified on the agenda but may
deliberate upon them.
§6 Quorum
All decisions are taken by a simple majority of the votes present and represented, unless it
is determined otherwise by Belgian legal provisions or by these present Articles of
Association. In the case of a tie, the vote of the Session Chair or their substitute is the
casting vote.
§7 Notification of dissolution or modification of articles of association
Any modifications to the Articles of Association or a decision by the General Assembly as
regards the dissolution must be notified, within one (1) month of the decision, to the clerk
of the tribunal of commerce for publication in the Belgian legal monitor.
§8 Notifications and minutes
All notifications and minutes, which shall contain the decisions of the General Assembly,
are drafted by the responsible administrators, are countersigned by the Session Chair, or
their substitute, and at least one of the Co-Presidents of the Association or, in their
absence, by two (2) duly appointed Effective Members elected by the General Assembly
for this task. They are kept at least in electronic form and in conditions guaranteeing
durability, readability, integrity, reliable and durable reproducibility. Each Effective
Member may request a copy of all minutes at least in electronic form. Unless otherwise
provided for by Belgian legal provisions or in the case of a special delegation by the Organ
of Administration, copies or excerpts of these minutes to be delivered to Third Parties or
used in Courts or elsewhere are signed by the Co-Presidents of the Association or in their
absence one other Administrator.
Article 16 - The Political Assembly
§1 Purpose
The Political Assembly defines, deliberates and decides on aspects relating to the political
life of the Association.
Volt Belgium I Page 12


§2 Composition
Unless decided otherwise by the General Assembly, the Political Assembly is composed by
all Effective Members and is presided by a Session Chair (or their Substitute) appointed by
the Organ of Administration.
§3 Occurrence
The Political Assembly convenes by default at the occasion of and acts as an integral part
of the General Assembly of the Association, including its agenda. The Political Assembly
may also meet more frequently whenever the interests of the Association require it.
§4 Competence
The Political Assembly has the competence for:
a)
The deliberation on and approval of the electoral strategy and political vision of
the Association, as proposed by the organ of Administration, in accordance with
the political and strategic direction of Volt Europa;
b) The deliberation on and approval of the procedure and working groups to develop
the programme and policies of the Association for the regional and federal level, as
proposed by a member of staff responsible for policy;
c)
The deliberation on and approval of the programme and policies of the Association
for the regional and federal level, as proposed by the working group(s) mandated
for developing the programmes and policies, in accordance with the political and
strategic direction of Volt Europa;
d) The deliberation on and approval of the nomination procedure of candidates for
Regional, Federal and European electoral lists in Belgium, as proposed by the
Electoral Commission;
e) The deliberation on and nomination of the candidates for European electoral lists
in Belgium;
f)
And deliberation and approval of procedures ensuring compliance of the political
guidelines and coherence among the Members, as well as electoral lists and
political factions in which Volt participates;
In the occasion of a General Assembly and if foreseen by the agenda, the competences of
the Political Assembly are exercised by the General Assembly.
§5 Additional Provisions on the Political Assembly
The General Assembly may adopt additional Provisions on the Political Assembly to define
procedures relating to the political life of the Association. Provisions on the Political
Volt Belgium I Page 13


Assembly may not conflict with the Articles of Association or the Code of Conduct and any
clauses that do are considered null and void.
Proposals to amend or to revise the Provisions on the Political Assembly may be submitted
to the General Assembly in accordance with the applicable Procedure.
Amendments to the Provisions on the Political Assembly must be adopted or ratified by
the General Assembly by a two-thirds (2/3) majority of the Effective Members present and
represented (by procuration) or voting electronically if foreseen by the Electoral
Commission.
Article 17 - Local Assemblies
§1 Purpose
Local Assemblies exist as the decision-making body designated for the Effective members
on subnational level.
§2 Composition
Established by virtue of the presence of at least six (6) Effective Members in the Register
of Members residing in a commune, or in a group of communes in Belgium on the basis of
a decision by the Provincial Council, or further defined in the Rules of Procedure of the
Association.
It ceases to exist by common agreement of the members, or when the assembly drops
below six (6) Effective Members in the Register of Members.
Associate Members may be invited to attend the Local Assembly which may grant the
Associate Members voting rights on Local Assembly proceedings by virtue of Articles of
Association.
§3 Occurrence
A Local Assembly meets at least annually, and more if the interests of the Local Assembly
so require. At this meeting, the discharge and election for all lapsed mandates relating to
the Local Assembly are held.
§4 Competence
Local Assemblies have the exclusive competence for:
a)
The election, appointment, and dismissal of all mandates inside the Local Assembly.
It may request the Electoral Commission to conduct elections and the counting of
voting results in accordance with these present Articles of Association and the
Rules of Procedure of the Association;
Volt Belgium I Page 14


b) The discharge of individuals holding a mandate referenced in the Articles of
Association;
c)
Approves the annual accounts, budget, financial reports, and annual work plan for
the Local Assembly in full compliance with the parameters defined by the General
Assembly ;
d) Execute together with the Provincial Council the local-level annual work plan
activities foreseen by the General Assembly;
e) Dissolution of the Local Assembly;
f)
And any other Acts where it is explicitly granted competence by these Articles of
Association, the Code of Conduct, or Rules of Procedure of the Association.
The geographical or social area covered and defined at the establishment of a Local
Assembly may be shared with other Local Assemblies. Local Assemblies therefore must
occasionally share competences with other Local Assemblies, in the spirit of the principle
of the “Unique Political Family” as defined in the Code of Conduct.
§5 Quorum
All decisions are taken by a simple majority of the votes present and represented, unless it
is determined otherwise by Belgian legal provisions or by these present Articles of
Association. In the case of a tie, the vote of the Session Chair or their substitute is the
casting vote.
§6 Notifications and minutes
All notifications and minutes, which shall contain the decisions of the Local Assembly, are
drafted by a duly appointed Effective Member elected by the Local Assembly for this task
and countersigned by the leadership of a Local Assembly or, in their absence, by two duly
appointed Effective Members elected by the Local Assembly for this task.
Article 18 - The Organ of Administration
§1 Purpose
The Organ of Administration (also referred to as The Board of Administrators) is
competent for the day-to-day implementation of the work plans adopted by the General
Assembly and setting the direction of the Association in its interim.
§2 Composition
The Organ of Administration is composed of at least five (5) and up to nine (9)
Administrators (also referred to as Board Members). The Administrators include at least
Volt Belgium I Page 15


two (2) gender-diverse Co-Presidents of the Association (or simply Co-Presidents), one (1)
Treasurer, one (1) Secretary and at least one (1) and up to five (5) additional administrator
without predefined roles, elected in this order. The portfolio of administrators without
predefined role is determined by the Organ of Administration itself at its constituting
meeting following the taking of office.
The Association needs to ensure, to the best of its abilities, that a gender parity is reached
within the Organ of Administration. This includes the following measures:
The Association charges the incumbent Organ of Administration with actively engaging
and reaching out to minority-gender members of the Association to promote candidacy for
the Organ of Administration, and the other organs of the Association;
When a single gender representation is higher than 50%+1, or when the elections of a new
Organ of Administration would result in such disparity, appointment to a position in the
board (excluding the positions of co-president) will go to the first eligible candidate of the
minority gender;
During the mandate of the Organ of Administration no further administrators without
predefined roles can be appointed from a majority gender, if that would push the majority
gender representation higher than 50%+1.
§3 Length of mandate
The Organ of Administration is elected for a mandate of two (2) years. Additional
Administrators may be by-elected by the General Assembly with their mandate ending at
the same time as the Organ of Administration as a whole.
Effective Members may be elected for two (2) consecutive mandates before the individual
must observe a period of ineligibility of one (1) mandate. Upon conclusion of that period
of ineligibility, the Effective Member is eligible again to run for the Organ of
Administration. Administrators by-elected more than half (50%<) way into the mandate of
the Organ of Administrators do not qualify for the ineligibility.
§4 Competence
The Organ of Administration benefits from the broadest powers to administer and
manage the Association within the limits of its purpose. In accordance with Belgian legal
provisions, the Organ of Administration has all powers not expressly reserved to the
General Assembly or other Organs of the Association by these Articles of Association, the
Code of Conduct, or Rules of Procedure of the Association. The Organ of Administration
has the exclusive competence, without this list being exhaustive, for:
(a) Acts and decisions required by these Articles of Association and those foreseen by
Belgian legal provisions;
(b) The preparation and adoption of all acts and contracts;
Volt Belgium I Page 16


(c) The opening and management of all banking accounts;
(d) The negotiation, agreement to acquire, acquisition, exchange, or sale all movable
and immovable goods;
(e) The decision to take a mortgage, borrow, lease;
(f) The acceptance of any legacy, subsidy, donation or transfer so long as they comply
with Belgian legal provisions,
(g) The renunciation of all rights of the Association;
(h) The representation of the Association in court both as plaintiff or defendant;
(i) The appointment and dismissal of Association staff; and
(j) The appointment of an ad-interim leadership of a Local Assembly until such time as
the Local Assembly by virtue of a Provincial Council decision have met the
conditions to establish a Local Assembly.
The Organ of Administration may delegate day-to-day responsibilities to members of staff.
§5 Meetings and notifications
The Organ of Administration meets at least one (1) time per month for an Administrative
Meeting (also referred to as Board Meeting). The Organ of Administration may also meet
more frequently whenever the interests of the Association require it.
An official meeting of the Organ of Administration is convened at the request of the
Co-Presidents of the Association, the written request of a majority of administrators as
notified to the Secretary, or a written request representing a simple majority of the
Provincial Representatives as notified to the Secretary.
The Provincial Council may, upon notification and justification to the Secretary, send a
representative to the meetings as a non-voting advisor.
§5 Quorum
The Organ of Administration deliberates validly when half of the administrators present or
represented participate in an Administration Meeting.
§6 Modality of decision-taking
The decisions of the Organ of Administrators are taken by a simple majority of votes
present or represented unless otherwise foreseen by these Articles of Associations. In the
event of a tie, the Co-Presidents of the Association jointly cast the deciding vote. Should
they be unable to act jointly, the decision is suspended until the next Administrative
Meeting. All decisions must be minuted by the Secretary of the Organ of Administration,
Volt Belgium I Page 17


including the vote split when decisions cannot be taken by consensus, and kept in a
Register for this purpose accessible at all times to the Effective Members.
§7 Resignation, absence, and revocation of mandates of Administrators
An Administrator may resign from their mandate in writing to the Secretary of the Organ
of Administration and the Co-Presidents of the Association. An administrator is considered
to have resigned following non-excused absences from two consecutive official
Administrative Meetings or three official Administrative Meetings in one year.
An Administrator may be suspended from their functions for other reasons by a
three-fourths (3/4) majority of the Organ of Administration. The Arbitration Commission
must be informed of the decision which is competent to reject or confirm the suspension,
or escalate to the General Assembly to revoke the mandate by simple majority.
In the event of a resignation, automatic removal, or revocation of a mandate, a by-election
must be conducted under the supervision of the Electoral Commission to elect a
replacement who shall complete the remaining term of the individual that they replace.
During the interim period and should the vacated post concern an Administrator with a
defined role in these Articles of Association, the responsibilities shall be held, ad-interim
and until the by-election is concluded, by one of the additional administrators.
Article 19 - The Provincial Council
§1 Purpose
The Provincial Council advises and supports the Organ of Administration on matters
pertaining to the management of the Association. The Provincial Council supervises the
implementation of the municipal, provincial and regional aspects of the Association’s
strategy and the decisions of the Organ of Administration. The Provincial Council acts as a
liaison between local assemblies and the Organ of Administration.
§2 Composition
The Provincial Council consists of up to 12 Provincial Representatives. Provincial
Representatives are appointed by the responsible Local Assembly of the ten (10) Belgian
Provinces, Brussels Region, and the Association’s Members living outside of the territory
of Belgium. A Local Assembly may further specify the procedure of appointment of their
Provincial Representative. Provincial Representatives represent their Local Assembly and
bring their activities, needs and wishes to the attention of the Provincial Council.
§3 Length of mandate
Provincial Representatives are appointed for a mandate of one (1) year.
Volt Belgium I Page 18


§4 Competence
The Provincial Council has the following competences and no others:
a)
Propose in collaboration with the Organ of Administration an annual work plan
listing the Associations priorities, and actions foreseen to the General Assembly;
b) Execute
together
with
Local
Assemblies,
the
regional,
provincial,
and
municipal-level annual work plan activities foreseen to the General Assembly;
c)
Solicit reports from leadership of Local Assemblies and coordinate their actions in
support of the annual work plan determined by the General Assembly;
d) Issue advice to the Organ of Administration on any decision that it takes that has an
impact on Local Assemblies;
When the Provincial Council meets the conditional threshold that fifty percent and one
(50% + 1) provincial Representatives are nominated, the Provincial Council shall have the
following additional competences:
e) Request a decision of the Organ of Administration be reviewed by the Arbitration
Commission for a binding review on the basis of a two-thirds (2/3) majority of the
Provincial
Council
should
the
Provincial
Council
find
that
the
Organ
of
Administration
exceed
its
powers
foreseen
by
these
present
Articles
of
Association, the Code of Conduct, or Rules of Procedure of Association;
f)
Rescind a decision of the Organ of Administration on the basis of a four-fifths (4/5)
majority of the Provincial Council, the Organ of Administration may appeal to the
Arbitration Commission who may confirm or reject the decision on the sole basis of
compliance with the present Articles of Association, the Code of Conduct and Rules
of Procedure of the Association.
§5 Meetings and notifications
The Provincial Council meets at least one (1) time per month. It may also meet more
frequently whenever the interests of the Association require it. The Provincial Council acts
jointly and with consensus, in the event of a disagreement.
The Organ of Administrators or a delegate are invited to attend all Provincial Council
meetings as a non-voting advisor, unless explicitly notified and justified by the Provincial
Council.
Article 20 - The Electoral Commission
§1 Purpose
The Electoral Commission manages and oversees the elections of the Association.
Volt Belgium I Page 19


§2 Composition
The Electoral Commission consists of a minimum of three (3) Members. The Members of
the Electoral Commission are elected by the General Assembly.
§3 Length of mandate
The Electoral Commission is elected for a mandate of one (1) year. Additional Members
may be elected by the General Assembly with their mandate ending at the same time as
the Electoral Commission as a whole.
§4 Competence
The Electoral Commission has the exclusive competence to manage, coordinate, and
execute all national and regional elections and votes of the Association. It may also, on
request of a Local Assembly, supervise processes of local elections and votes.
§5 Meetings and notifications
The Electoral Commission meets at least one (1) time per quartal. It may also meet more
frequently whenever the interests of the Association require it. The Electoral Commission
acts jointly and with consensus, in the event of a disagreement.
The Organ of Administrators or a delegate are invited to attend all Electoral Commission
meetings as a non-voting advisor, unless explicitly notified and justified by the Electoral
Commission.
Article 21 - The Arbitration Commission
§1 Purpose
The Arbitration Commission is the guardian of these Articles of Association, as well as the
Code of Conduct and the Rules of Procedure of the Association.
§2 Composition
The Arbitration Commission consists of a minimum of three (3) Members. The Members of
the Arbitration Commission are elected by the General Assembly.
The Arbitration Commission is composed of a minimum of two (2) Co-Chairs and up to four
(4) full members elected from the Effective Members. The Members of the Arbitration
Commission may not hold any other leadership roles in the Association during their
mandate.
The Arbitration Commission sits in rotating chambers for the purposes of mediation and
disciplinary actions. Arbitration Commission members sitting in a mediation procedure
may not sit in a related disciplinary procedure except for the purposes of representing the
Volt Belgium I Page 20


Mediation chamber. It sits in plenary for the purposes of adjudicating expedited
disciplinary procedures.
§3 Length of mandate
The Arbitration Commission is elected for a mandate of one (1) year. Additional Members
may be elected by the General Assembly with their mandate ending at the same time as
the Arbitration Commission as a whole.
§4 Competence
The Arbitration Commission when sitting in full chamber is competent for taking decisions
on:
(a) Appeals of a Disciplinary decisions which it may accept or reject only on the basis of
procedural error;
(b) Reviews requested by the Organs of the Association on their validity with regards
to these Articles of Association, Code of Conduct, and Rules of Procedure of the
Association;
(c) Appeals of the Organ of Administration on a decision by the Provincial Council to
rescind a decision of the Organ of Administration on the sole basis of compliance
with Articles of Association, Code of Conduct, and Rules of Procedure of the
Association;
(d) Appeals of an Organ of the Association on a decision to create a new Commission
or Committee on the sole basis of non-compliance;
(e) Tabling to the General Assembly proposals to amend Articles of Association, Code
of Conduct, and Rules of Procedure of the Association;
(f) Formally request the General Assembly to ratify amendments to the Code of
Conduct.
(g) Following the allocation of an expedited process, adjudicate to meet the time
frame the case requires.
Further provisions and rules of procedure may be defined in the Rule of Procedure of the
Association.
§5 Meetings and notifications
The Arbitration Commission meets at least one (1) time per quartal. It may also meet more
frequently whenever the interests of the Association require it. The Arbitration
Commission acts jointly and with consensus, in the event of a disagreement.
Volt Belgium I Page 21


Part IV. Governance Documents of The
Association
Article 22 - Amendments of the Articles of Association
In accordance with Belgian legal provisions, the General Assembly must meet a quorum of
at least two-thirds (2/3) of the Effective Members validly listed in the Register of Effective
Members on the date the General Assembly convocation was published to validly take a
decision to amend its Articles of Association. If such a quorum has not been reached, the
General Assembly may be convened at earliest 15 days after the failed General Assembly
and no quorum is then required.
In accordance with Belgian legal provisions, amendments to the Articles of Association
must be adopted by the General Assembly by a two-thirds (2/3) majority of the Effective
Members present and represented (by procuration) or voting electronically if foreseen by
the Electoral Commission.
In accordance with Belgian legal provisions, amendments to the Purpose and Activities of
the Association must be approved by a four-fifths (4/5) majority of the Effective Members
present and represented (by procuration) or voting electronically if foreseen by the
Electoral Commission.
Article 23 - Code of Conduct
The Association may adopt a Code of Conduct which defines acceptable behaviour and
norms required for Effective and Associate Members. Subscription to the Code of Conduct
(the Code) and acceptance of its disciplinary procedures are obligatory conditions for
Membership. Annexes to the Code of Conduct are an indivisible part of it and carry the
same enforceability by the relevant Organs of the Association on Effective and Associate
Members.
A breach to the Code of Conduct by a Member constitutes grounds for disciplinary action
in accordance with the present Articles of Association and applicable Rules of Procedure
of the Association.
The Code of Conduct may not conflict with the Articles of Association and any clauses that
are considered null and void.
Amendments to the Code of Conduct of the Association must be adopted or ratified by
the General Assembly by a two-thirds (2/3) majority of the Effective Members present and
represented (by procuration) or voting electronically if foreseen by the Electoral
Commission.
Volt Belgium I Page 22


Article 24 - Rules of Procedure of the Association
The General Assembly may adopt additional Rules of Procedure of the Association to
further specify these Articles of Association. Rules of Procedure of the Association may
not conflict with the Articles of Association or the Code of Conduct and any clauses that
do are considered null and void.
Proposals to amend or to revise the Rules of Procedure of the Association may be
submitted to the General Assembly in accordance with the applicable Procedure.
Amendments to the Rules of Procedure of the Association must be adopted or ratified by
the General Assembly by a two-thirds (2/3) majority of the Effective Members present and
represented (by procuration) or voting electronically if foreseen by the Electoral
Commission.
Article 25 - Rules of Procedure of the Political Assembly
The General Assembly may adopt additional Rules of Procedure of the Political Assembly
to define procedures relating to the political life of the Association. Rules of Procedure of
the Political Assembly may not conflict with the Articles of Association or the Code of
Conduct and any clauses that do are considered null and void.
Proposals to amend or to revise the Rules of Procedure of the Political Assembly may be
submitted to the General Assembly in accordance with the applicable Procedure.
Amendments to the Rules of Procedure of the Political Assembly must be adopted or
ratified by the General Assembly by a two-thirds (2/3) majority of the Effective Members
present and represented (by procuration) or voting electronically if foreseen by the
Electoral Commission.
Article 26 - Financial Provisions
The General Assembly may adopt Financial Provisions to define provisions connected to
financial aspects of the Association, such as but not limited to membership fees, other
types of incomes and expenditures, reimbursement and management of mobile and
immobile assets. The Financial Provisions may not conflict with the Articles of Association
or the Code of Conduct and any clauses that do are considered null and void.
Proposals to amend or to revise the Financial Provisions may be submitted to the General
Assembly in accordance with the applicable Procedure.
Amendments to the Financial Provision must be adopted or ratified by the General
Assembly by a two-thirds (2/3) majority of the Effective Members present and represented
(by procuration) or voting electronically if foreseen by the Electoral Commission.
Volt Belgium I Page 23


Article 27 - Legal reference
All issues not explicitly covered by these Articles of Association, the Code of Conduct, the
Rules of Procedure of the Association, and other adopted governance documents adopted
by the General Assembly shall be governed by Belgian legal provisions including but not
limited to the Belgian Code on Associations and Companies consequently, any clauses
within these present Articles of Association, or within any other governance document of
the Association which conflict with legal Belgian provisions are considered null and void.
Volt Belgium I Page 24


Part
V.
Financial
and
operational
oversight, and regulatory compliance
Article 28 - Budget
The General Assembly adopts annually a budget on the basis of the Annual Work Plan,
prepared and proposed by the Treasurer in collaboration with the Organ of Administration
of the Association and following a consultation of the Provincial Council.
Article 29 - Annual work plan
The General Assembly adopts annually a Work Plan, prepared and proposed by the Organ
of Administration for the national priorities, objectives and activities, and the Provincial
Council for the local priorities, objectives and activities which shall serve as the guiding
document for the activities of the Association.
Article 30 - Annual report
The Organ of Administration and the Provincial Council jointly prepare an Annual Report
summarising key activities of the Association to present at the annual General Assembly.
Article 31 - Financial report and Annual Accounts
The Treasurer in collaboration with the Organ of Administration and following a
consultation of the Provincial Council prepares a financial report and annual accounts
summarising the key accounting movements of the Association to present at the annual
General Assembly. The financial report and annual accounts may be subject to an
independent verification by assessors and/or auditors appointed by the General Assembly.
In accordance with Belgian legal provisions, these must be approved within six (6) months
of the close of the fiscal year and submitted to the clerk of the Commercial Tribunal of the
applicable judicial district.
Volt Belgium I Page 25


