We shape solution-orientated, forward-looking policies throughout Europe. For we are convinced that common challenges require cross-border solutions. Anyone who is serious about the future of Europe must think and act in European terms. Our vision: a united Europe with a federal democracy. That is why we must utilise pragmatic solutions from Europe to reform the healthcare and education systems and to make our economies more digital and socially just. That is why we must tackle the climate crisis together.

Here you will find some of our most important political topics. However, for a complete overview of all our demands, please consult our

A thriving EU with renewed legitimacy

A thriving EU with renewed legitimacy

At Volt, we believe in fortifying the EU’s capacity for collective action, ensuring that Member States collaborate effectively to address shared challenges. Central to this is the bolstering of the EU’s democratic legitimacy.

An autonomous military & civil defence capability

Initiate a European Convention to reform the European Treaties in the new legislative term

Build the path towards a European Federal Declaration

Establish the right of legislative initiative for the European Parliament

Everything in 'A thriving EU with renewed legitimacy'

Though equality, fairness and democracy are fundamental European values, they are not a reality for everyone across the continent. Our society is divided by factors such as wealth, race, gender and ability: arbitrary differences that lift some up while excluding others.

Ensure that the fundamental rights of LGBTQIA+ people are respected across the Union

Support the development of an inclusive, high-quality education system

Everything in 'Thriving Together'

A new economy that works for everyone

A new economy that works for everyone

The EU has become the world's largest economy and leading trading bloc through decades of economic integration: this achievement has brought higher incomes, peace, stability, and improved well-being across the bloc.

Triple funding to Horizon Europe

Foster a thriving industry across the bloc

One voice for the EU in the world

Implement widespread carbon pricing

Everything in 'A new economy that works for everyone'

An ambitious climate agenda for Europe

An ambitious climate agenda for Europe

The undeniable effects of climate change have destabilised weather patterns and led to the collapse of ecosystems. To mitigate climate change we know that we must eliminate greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, and transition to greener economies.

Achieve climate neutrality by 2040

A bold strategy to meet the Paris Agreement 1.5° limit

Extend the use of the European Union Emissions Trading System

Reduce harmful industrial emissions

Everything in 'An ambitious climate agenda for Europe'

Volt has defined 5+1 fundamental Challenges that need to be tackled in each European country and in Europe as a whole.

The 5 Challenges are basically the same for every country, but their implementation can be adapted on the national level to take into account local realities.

The +1 Challenge – our proposal to reform and strengthen the EU – is identical across all our national programmes.

Education and digitalisation are key elements of the 21st century

An innovative economy must be the engine of society's progress

No-one should be left behind - no matter their gender, income, religion. or origin

Europe needs to assume responsibility for its role in global challenges

People must be empowered to influence politics beyond elections alone

We love the EU - this doesn't mean there is no room for improvement