Electoral 
Moonshot 
Programme
2024-29 Policy Acts


2
3
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
Moonshot Programme  
Introduction 
At the heart of our vision for a renewed European Union (EU) is a transformative journey 
towards a Federal Europe. We believe that the way the EU functions internally and how it 
projects its global responsibilities externally need a radical evolution.  
First, the EU needs radical democratic change. This evolution is not merely a top-down 
endeavour but a collective effort involving citizens and political leaders across Europe. 
Through this deliberative and participatory process, Europeans will have a European 
Constitution that enshrines their power and rights into a new system that is not only more 
responsive but also more engaging for its citizens.
This democratic revolution will motor into a permanent general citizen’s assembly, 
inviting Europeans to actively participate in shaping the future of the EU, and redesigning 
democracy to foster trust, transparency, and collective determination.
We will advocate for a renewed European Parliament, shaped by transnational parties, 
holding the power to initiate, amend, and approve legislation, making governance more 
reflective of citizens’ interests than Member States’ concerns. Accessible sessions and 
qualified majority voting must replace outdated veto powers, ensuring that decisions align 
with the principles of the European Constitution. In this new Federal Europe, Member 
States can no longer defy EU principles, and the European Court of Justice must wield 
enhanced powers to prevent democratic backsliding, safeguarding the Unions’ integrity.
In our aspirations, Europe’s internal security must be fortified by a federal-level police 
force, that is a reinvigorated Europol ready to combat any threat to the safety of 
Europeans. Whether it is (financial) crime, terrorism, or cybersecurity, this revamped force 
shall stand as a guardian against evolving challenges.
Alongside a more democratic and secure Union, the expansion of the European project 
embodies the essence of Europe’s shared peace and prosperity. That is why we believe 
that the EU must embrace new members who share our commitment to democratic values 
and human rights. Safeguarding against democratic backsliding, we lay the foundation for 
an EU that not only holds itself accountable but actively advocates for justice and equality.
This transformation goes beyond rhetoric. The EU’s economy must reach net zero by 2040, 
minimizing greenhouse gas emissions and compensating for the unavoidable through 
carbon capture technologies. European citizens and businesses shall actively align their 
behaviours with political targets, creating a groundswell of collective action.
This future cannot be built without solid foundations built on the EU’s strategic 
autonomy. From achieving energy self-sufficiency by 2040 to generating all energy 
domestically through renewable technologies, nuclear, and hydrogen energy. This is our 
aspiration for Europe’s shared green future, with citizens actively participating in a diverse 
and flexible energy mix and energy storage infrastructures capable of achieving a stable 
and reliable energy supply.
Our aspiration towards a renewed green European economy demands a pioneering 
approach to redesigning the EU’s infrastructure, driven by sustainability, resilience, and 
comfort. High-speed rail, efficient public transportation, clean energy, and advanced 
internet connectivity are the bedrock of Europe’s future. Our waste management systems 
must be sustainable, and infrastructure investments must act as bulwarks against the 
ravages of climate change, creating jobs and fueling economic growth. 
To meet the challenges Europe faces, we aspire to a renewed economic prosperity, 
one that intertwines seamlessly with environmental sustainability. We redefine growth 
metrics, birthing the ‘Green Net GDP,’ decoupling economic progress from the clutches 
of environmental degradation. Carbon and resource pricing mechanisms steer industries 
toward sustainability, and the generated revenues fuel innovation and the transition to 
a greener economy. A pan-European Social Contract ensures that prosperity is a shared 
legacy, with citizens actively shaping economic decisions.
A new pan-European Social Contract demands transcending the limitations of the past—a 
Europe where every citizen is empowered to unleash their full potential, unshackled 
by the constraints of inequality based on social background, disability, race, ethnicity, 
or religion.  Such efforts must include a fairer and more transparent system against tax 
evasion and avoidance. Through global cooperation, high transparency, and effective 
enforcement, we must create a progressive and streamlined taxation system. Every 
citizen shall contribute willingly, secure in the knowledge that they are paying their fair 
share. Our vision is bold, and our mission is clear: to dismantle barriers to success and 
forge a society where fairer wealth distribution and equal opportunities flourish.
Our journey toward inclusivity commences with a resolute commitment to accessible 
healthcare for all, ensuring a robust foundation for every child. Childhood, in our 
aspiration, shall be fostered by inclusive, gender-sensitive, and culturally responsive 
education. Daycare and preschool programs are the catalysts for equalizing opportunities, 
providing unwavering support for children with unique needs. The education system 
envisioned as the engine of social mobility, moves us toward a future where primary 
and secondary education, as well as higher education, are not luxuries but birthrights. 
Financial means must meet this commitment, paving the way for a society rooted in our 
fundamental values.


4
5
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
Our educational paradigm is revolutionary, placing the student at the centre and embracing 
interdisciplinary learning and project-based approaches. Education, in our aspiration, goes beyond 
the mere acquisition of knowledge—it shapes responsible citizens, instilling democratic thinking, 
media literacy, and critical thought. Across borders, harmonized educational systems foster a 
socially united Europe that celebrates cultural differences and facilitates mobility.
Celebrating diversity in Europe demands treating migrants, and refugees, including climate 
refugees, with respect, dignity, and compassion. We envision a continent where no one perishes 
at sea, economic migrants are not criminalized, and those seeking refuge have the right to not 
only belong but also to thrive, provided with essential living conditions, healthcare, employment 
opportunities, and education, including language training. 
Respect and dignity are our compass that drives our aspiration towards robust worker rights, 
decent living wages, health and safety protections, unionization rights, and flexible working 
arrangements. Whether as workers, entrepreneurs, or freelancers, a comprehensive social safety 
net unfurls, granting the freedom to take risks without the spectre of financial instability. European 
society must cherish work-life balance, affording ample time for personal pursuits, family, and 
friends.
Addressing these internal challenges only would not bring the necessary radical change for 
Europeans to thrive. 
Our aspiration for Europe transcends mere unity but demands the EU to be a beacon of strength 
and influence on the global stage. Picture a future where the European Armed Forces, evolving 
to surpass national boundaries, become a symbol of solidarity and security. Fueled by a shared 
defence budget and strategic resource management, this transformation does not just secure 
Europeans’ interests; it builds strategic autonomy, all while upholding the principles of democratic 
accountability.
Our aspiration does not stop at securing our borders; it is a blueprint for a future EU foreign policy 
that resonates with coherence and proactivity on a global scale. Imagine a streamlined foreign 
policy decision-making, led by the European Ministry of Foreign Affairs and guided by the European 
Minister of Foreign Affairs, with an elevated role for the European Parliament ensuring rigorous 
democratic oversight. These internal reforms are necessary for the EU to project our aspirations 
onto the international stage, with the EU becoming a major force in multilateral organizations, 
spearheading a reformed United Nations. The EU must act as a global democracy seriously, standing 
as one voice to champion the rights of minorities and the fight for climate justice. Diplomacy and 
economic resources must be used as tools for promoting peace, security, and stability worldwide.
The EU must lead with responsibility, advocating for the vulnerable, and shaping a future where 
unity is not just a concept but a force for positive change on a global scale. It is our internal unity 
and our internal environmental and economic aspirations that will enable the EU to meet the global 
challenge of climate change and climate justice. By consistently engaging with the world, the EU 
must not only secure its future but pave the way for a stable, low-emission world where global 
warming is confidently projected to stay below 2 degrees by 2040.
The EU must become a hub for climate-positive projects worldwide, offering long-term, low-interest 
loans and stimulating private capital, for the sake of achieving climate justice commitments. The EU 
has the responsibility to support global communities in transitioning to sustainable, low-emission 
pathways, reinforcing its commitment to the Paris Agreement. The only future we must strive for is 
one of sustainability, resilience, and equity converging for the benefit of all.
We envision a Europe that actively proactively boosts the economies of non-European countries, 
addressing root causes of displacement through durable development cooperation, financial aid, 
and educational programs; dismantles networks of illegal migration, prioritizing the needs of the 
victims; and ensures legal pathways for both refugees and migrants that are standardized across all 
Member States, embracing inclusion, equal burden-sharing, and the free movement of people. Our 
cooperation must be built on democratic values, aiming to reduce poverty, conflict, climate change, 
and political instability.
The urgency is clear, and waiting is not an option. Climate change, conflicts, overcrowded camps, 
and societal resistance demand immediate action. Together, with people—be they Europeans, 
migrants, or refugees—at the centre of our aspirations, we can fashion a future that is thriving 
for all. So, let us stride into this future, fueled by the fire of optimism and the conviction that our 
actions today will forge a Europe where every dream can flourish and every citizen has boundless 
possibilities. The time for action is now, and together, we shall shape a tomorrow that surpasses 
even our most ambitious aspirations.
Chief Editors of the Moonshot Program
Claudio Lanza, 
Head of Policy at Volt Europa 
Ines Bravo Figueiredo, 
Head of Policy at Volt Europa


7
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP
6
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAM POLICY PROPOSALS
The EU is today the world’s largest economy and biggest trading bloc, thanks to decades of 
economic integration within and outside its borders. This economic powerhouse and its ties to 
the world have enabled significant societal advancement from rising income levels to peace and 
stability, and increased well-being.
While the groundwork of economic cohesion remains crucial, we are in desperate need of an 
upgrade of our framework to master the shortcomings and challenges we are facing today, within 
Europe and across the world. These include the climate crisis, geopolitical vulnerabilities, the 
digital transformation and social polarisation fuelling extremist politics. We must therefore 
create measures that encourage innovation, ensure effective taxation and redirect funds to pay 
into both sustainability and an equitable society within and across countries.
As a progressive movement, we challenge old narratives posing tradeoffs between economic 
growth and inequality or sustainability. Instead, we promote a vision where policies protect, 
provide opportunities, and drive economic progress simultaneously. In order to steer towards 
long-lasting prosperity, our measures of growth must include both planetary boundaries and 
their effects on an equitable and resilient society.  
Likewise, prioritising research and innovation is paramount for nurturing European innovative 
and existing industries while addressing global societal challenges such as climate change, 
digitalization, and health threats. Frameworks for the adoption of innovations such as carbon 
capture technologies or AI, need to be put in place to enable companies of various sizes and 
consumers to benefit from those innovations while ensuring our planetary and social boundaries 
are met (e.g. data protection, energy consumption). 
Our Prosperous Jobs and Wealth Fairness Act complements the current Act, with an array of 
measures that redefine governance and fortify the social safety net for all European citizens on 
our path to shared prosperity.
Our vision is a significant shift in the current economic paradigm, one that supports Europe’s 
transition to sustainable prosperity. Spearheading this shift in Europe to achieve simultaneously 
economic, social and environmental welfare, Europe will continue contributing to spreading 
those developments across continents and thereby strengthen democracies across the world.
1. Empowering 
Europe’s Path 
to Prosperity 
STRONGER EU: EUROPE’S GEOPOLICITAL LEADERSHIP
	
1. Empowering Europe’s Path to Prosperity 	
7
	
2. Foreign Affairs and Defence Act 	
20
QUALITY OF LIFE
	
3. Thriving Together Act	
34
	
4. Good Jobs and Shared Prosperity Act	
49
HUMANE MIGRATION
	
5. Asylum Seekers and Refugees Act 	
59
	
6. Labour Migration Act 	
75
MAKING VOTES COUNT
	
7. Reform the EU Act 	
82
	
8. European Democracy Act 	
92
LIVEABLE PLANET
	
9. Climate Transition Act	
109
	
10. Healthy Ecosystems Act	
128
Moonshot Programme
2024-29 Policy Acts


8
9
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP
Increase efforts in European institutions to 
coordinate data collection and usage for 
the creation of more sustainable economic 
indicators. 
Use sustainability and quality-of-life 
indicators as KPIs and inputs for the EU 
policy and the application of the European 
fiscal rules, the EU budget, and the 
European Semester processes.
Create innovative and competitive industrial 
clusters instead of a single industrial core, 
following a geographic strategy that allows 
beneficial European infrastructure projects 
to proceed by removing veto power from 
any single Member State.
Establish a full-scale European venture 
program to raise and provide private and 
public risk capital to help bring innovative 
European products and services to the 
global market. This should be administered 
through the European Investment Fund. 
Triple the EU budget to €3 trillion over 
seven years to support this ambitious 
agenda, resorting to new European debt 
and taxes as detailed in the Reform Europe 
Act.
Improve the education and qualification 
of European citizens, as detailed in the 
Thriving Together Act, as a necessary 
condition for this investment.
1. 	New Economic 
Paradigm
2. 	Investing in the Industry 
of the Future 
Pursue a progressive economic framework 
through an updated GDP indicator that 
includes natural capital accounting, 
encompassing the extraction, depletion, 
and deregulation of natural capital in 
economic activity.
 Complement GDP with quality of life 
indicators and well-being indicators, such 
as employment, mental and physical health, 
recreation and leisure time.
Triple the commitment to Horizon Europe 
to make it fit for purpose in funding 
research and innovation programmes that 
tackle climate change, help to achieve the 
UN’s Sustainable Development Goals and 
boost the EU’s competitiveness and growth. 
This will be central to establishing an EU-led 
and pan-European public-private investment 
that benefits all Member States.
Through this programme, we propose to:
Increase investment in innovation 
of public goods and state-funded 
services that have been side-lined 
for too long. Health, education, 
cybersecurity, human-centred AI, 
microtechnology, and networks must 
work for all EU citizens and be geared 
towards projects with a clear focus on 
sustainability and green growth.
Increase funds to support programmes 
that improve the digitalisation of our 
public processes and functions, as we 
detail in the Thriving Together Act.
 
Develop research in critical and 
underdeveloped sustainability areas as 
detailed in the Climate Transition Act 
and Healthy Ecosystems Act.
 
Create a European defence Industrial 
base to support the creation of an 
effective European Armed Forces, as 
we advocate in the Foreign Affairs and 
Defence Act.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.


10
11
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP
Extend the 20% target to produce 
semiconductors in the EU by 2030 to 
electrolysers, inverters, batteries and 
critical components for solar panels and 
wind turbines.
Ensure the availability of raw materials and 
extend the Critical Raw Materials Act to 
include compulsory licensing for exporting 
critical resources.
manufacturer’s supply chain) in product 
specifications.
Ensuring that current and new technology 
does not violate fundamental rights and 
freedoms, for example, by requiring 
mandatory audits of AI systems so that 
they don’t infringe on privacy or produce 
discriminatory effects.
Supporting entrepreneurs to fit into 
the regulatory framework of the EU. In 
particular, creating regulatory sandboxes 
and including funding for technological 
compliance in existing and forthcoming EU 
funding programmes.
Ensuring that digital technologies are taxed 
fairly, based on where the digital product’s 
revenue is generated.
Strengthening EU frameworks to ensure 
that providers operating in Europe future-
proof their emerging and disruptive 
technologies. Future-proofing is especially 
important in the current global Industrial 
Revolution 4.0 and is an enabler for the 
EU to promote its values in international 
dialogue.
3. Green Economy
4. Responsible Digital 
Transformation
Implement carbon pricing that is 
mainstreamed to all sectors of the economy 
with revenues redirected towards green 
investments, as detailed in the Climate 
Transition Act.
Introduce regulatory standards to ban 
planned obsolescence, promote circular 
practices and reduce material footprint.
Continuously research technologies and the 
impact of current legislation, to create new 
legislation that facilitates the evolution of 
digital technology in a way that upholds 
European values and creates industries of 
the future in Europe, focussing on seven 
principles:
Ensuring the safety and security of users 
of digital technology, for example, by 
ensuring that all organisations within the 
EU assess their exposure to the impact of 
quantum computing and create a migration 
plan to post-quantum cryptographic 
protocols where necessary. Similarly, e.g., 
communicating annually to the public the 
security posture of critical infrastructure.
Fostering open-source and accessible 
technology, for example, increasing access 
of EU institutions and industries to open-
source software, by avoiding legislation 
that hinders open-source contributions or 
threatens net neutrality and ensuring that 
everyone in Europe gets access to new 
technologies.
Advancing sustainable and long-lasting 
technology, for example, by strengthening 
the ‘right to repair’ so that anyone who 
wants to repair their product themselves 
has access to affordable spare parts and 
repair information. Similarly, e.g., requiring 
manufacturers to publish the ecological 
footprint of products (including the 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.


12
13
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP
Put in place rules that prevent the use of 
European taxpayer-funded investment 
programs in importing from outside the 
EEA goods and services that have critical 
strategic importance for the economic 
autonomy of the EU. Such imports create 
reliance on foreign goods and services, 
which contradicts our desired goal of 
enhanced strategic autonomy. 
Introduce a Small Business Act for Europe 
which reserves 25% of public contracts on 
EU and national level for European SMEs 
and validates legislation and requirements 
on both levels not to be harmful to SMEs.
Simplify the public procurement process 
and reporting requirements for SMEs.
Further develop our capital markets for 
both debt and equity financing and saving, 
especially for our small and medium-sized 
companies, and make it easier to raise 
capital via alternative financial instruments, 
such as crowdfunding and peer-to-peer 
lending.
Strengthen corporate governance standards 
to reduce the risk of mismanagement, 
fraud, and excessive speculation, through a 
fair tax system. Raise capital requirements 
for banks to avoid the need for excessive 
taxpayer subsidies to banks.
5. Institutionalise our European 
Investment Schemes
6. A deeply integrated 
European market
Make the Resilience and Recovery Facility, 
which is the largest EU program that 
promotes economic development and social 
and environmental goals, a permanent 
element of the negotiations on the next 
multiannual financial framework. Focus 
on the strategic autonomy of the EU by 
strengthening our supply chains and 
subsidising the reshoring of critical goods 
and inputs.
Extend and strengthen programs that 
provide support for small and medium-sized 
enterprises, such as InvestEU, especially 
those showing innovative business models 
and providing critical goods. In selecting 
investments, consider how to strengthen 
areas that have been affected by 
outmigration (“brain drain”) to counteract 
the core-periphery status quo of the 
European economy.
Champion European market integration, 
especially that of financial markets, by 
ensuring that entrepreneurs in Eastern 
Europe have the same financing potential as 
those in Western Europe.
Complete the Banking and Capital Markets 
Union and introduce European deposit 
insurance and sovereign bond-backed 
securities to provide safer assets to banks 
for backing safe deposits, thus supporting 
the continuous harmonisation and 
integration of European supervision and 
regulation.
Progress towards backing European safe 
assets by sovereign debt issued by the EU 
and backed by European debt and taxes. 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.


14
15
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP
Trade deals must take into account the 
economic realities in third countries and be 
to the benefit of both parties
Grant the EU the right to prevent FDI 
into the European economy or the use 
of foreign-produced parts in critical 
infrastructure if it concludes that these 
pose a security risk, thus ensuring that the 
EU retains the necessary autonomy.
Grant the EU the right to purchase any asset 
directly that is to be sold to a foreign buyer, 
if such sale would pose a security risk.
7. Trade, Sustainability 
and Human Rights
8.	Protecting Critical 
Infrastructure 
Embed obligatory human rights and 
ecological sustainability into all trade 
agreements and review agreements or stop 
negotiations if consistent violations are 
identified.
Take measures to monitor and identify 
products made with forced labour and 
prevent them from entering the EU market.
Promote a broad definition of European 
critical infrastructure, including 
transportation systems, waste & water 
infrastructure, healthcare and public 
health services, energy grids, harbours, 
airports, nuclear power plants, digital 
communication networks, data centres, 
network cables, arable land and chemical 
facilities.
Prioritise investment in critical Pan-
European infrastructure projects, including 
a renewed commitment to the Trans-
European Transport Networks (TEN-T) by 
doubling the Connecting Europe Facility 
(CEF) funding instrument
Allow the EU to prevent potentially 
dangerous foreign direct investment 
(FDI) in critical infrastructure by creating 
consistent FDI screening mechanisms across 
Member States.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.


16
17
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP
Introduce a digital Euro as a useful medium 
of payment for the unbanked, creating 
competitive pressure in the market for 
deposits and payments. This should not 
have any holding limits and include salary 
payments. 
Safeguard the position of cash as legal 
tender in our society, but limit real estate 
transactions in cash to prevent money 
laundering. 
the private and corporate wealth resides. 
By improving the flow of information 
between national authorities we can better 
understand wealth inequality, fight tax 
evasion, and stop the flow of illicit money 
from abroad into Europe.
Implement a central wealth register 
by merging data from various 
sources, such as national tax and 
real estate register data. Grant this 
responsibility to the EU Ministry of 
Finance, proposed in the Reform the 
EU Act, allowing it to close the current 
informational gap on the distribution 
and geography of wealth.
 
Create mechanisms to exchange data 
with other such registers worldwide, 
especially regarding information 
about offshore tax havens. European 
data protection standards have to be 
ensured in such exchanges.
 
Allow the Ministry of Finance to 
negotiate agreements for the mutual 
sharing of such data with the clearing 
houses in international financial 
centres.
 
Enforce the EU rules on the obligation 
of establishing beneficial ownership 
registers, so that real estate investors 
can no longer hide behind anonymous 
front companies. 
9. Secure and Competitive 
Payments and Financial 
Services 
10. Fighting tax evasion 
and avoidance 
Introduce measures that give EU citizens 
and companies secure and affordable 
options for payments and digital financial 
services, avoiding market dominance by a 
few players that charge high transaction 
fees:
Ensure competition in the market for 
consumer financial services and incentivise 
the adoption of useful financial technology 
products, such as non-exclusive card 
payments or instant bank transfers. 
Initiate antitrust proceedings in cases 
where the market is captured by a small 
number of dominant firms.
Consider the establishment of a European 
public payment processing corporation, if 
the large American payment processing 
firms are found to use a dominant market 
position to charge excessive fees. 
Combat tax evasion and avoidance, 
which are rampant in the EU due to tax 
competition between Member States that 
often allows large international firms to 
evade taxes, while small and medium-sized 
enterprises pay their fair share:
Harmonise corporate taxation by using 
a Common Consolidated Corporate 
Tax Base in the EU and introduce 
formulary apportionment of profits of 
multinational corporations.
	
Mandate a minimum effective 
corporate tax rate of at least 22% 
and introduce obligatory national 
top-up taxes for profits from lower 
tax jurisdictions to effectively reach 
at least 22%. Furthermore, allow 
optional national top-up taxes up to 
the domestic tax rate.
Facilitate the automatic and 
mandatory exchange of information 
between all EU Member States, with 
the new EU Ministry of Finance as a 
coordinating institution, as proposed 
in the Reform the EU Act.
We want Europe to effectively fight 
tax evasion and illicit money flows but 
policymakers’ available information about 
the distribution and geography of wealth 
is very limited. We do not have an overview 
of where, in Europe or offshore, much of 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.


18
19
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP
proposed by the Commission are necessary, 
including Regulation (EU) 2023/1781 (Chips 
Act), the Critical Raw Materials Act (not yet 
adopted), or the Net Zero Industry Act (not 
yet adopted). Likewise, Volt’s policies aiming 
at the completion of the Banking and Capital 
Markets Union require the adoption of new 
secondary legislation in this area, without 
Treaty change. Furthermore, to facilitate the 
exchange of information between Member 
States the introduction of new secondary 
legislation, potentially amending existing 
instruments such as Council Directive 2011/16/
EU on administrative cooperation in the field 
of taxation, is necessary. In addition, new 
investments as mentioned by the Act require 
an agreement of Member States over the 
increase of the EU budget in the context of 
the multiannual financial framework. Lastly, 
the “Institutionalise our Investment Schemes” 
pillar will require an amendment of Directive 
2014/24/EU on public procurement.
Examples of annual costs are salaries and 
benefits, administrative costs, infrastructure 
maintenance, or the costs associated with the 
running of the proposed policies. 
The total costs of the complete Moonshot 
Program are mentioned separately from the 
total income.
How we will pursue this act 
in the European Parliament
Costs and Income of the 
proposals included in the Act
The “Empowering Europe’s Path to Prosperity” 
Act requires major and minor changes to the 
existing European Union legal framework. 
Some proposed reforms would likely require 
amendments to the Treaties such as, for 
example, the use of new indicators for the 
application of European Union budget rules 
which would entail an amendment of Articles 
121 and 126 TFEU, and of Protocol 12 of the 
Treaty. Similarly, some of the measures aimed 
at granting the Commission more powers 
in the sphere of national security to protect 
critical infrastructures require Treaty change, 
as national security remains a sphere of 
competence of the Member States. Moreover, a 
European safe asset backed by sovereign debt 
issued by the European Union and European 
debt and taxes are likely to require Treaty 
change.
Further policies that Volt proposes need less 
far-reaching amendments to existing legislative 
or administrative instruments. For instance, 
to realise the measures aimed at fostering the 
Green Economy new legislative instruments 
and amendments to secondary law in force or 
The total costs of this Act, which consist of 
the implementation costs and the annual 
costs for five years, is € 316.364.000.000.  The 
implementation costs are €308.646.500.000 
and the annual costs are € 1.543.500.000.
Examples of implementation costs in the 
Moonshot Program are the policy and legal 
framework development, the capacity building 
and training of (new) staff, the building of IT 
or physical infrastructure, or public awareness 
campaigns.


21
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP
20
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP
Volt Europe
More than a decade ago, the European Union won the Nobel Peace Prize in recognition 
of its successful prevention of war among its members following two devastating World 
Wars. However, in 2022, war erupted again on the European continent, as Russia attacked 
Ukraine. The lesson is that achieving peace in Europe cannot only be done by looking 
inward, as freedom must be better armed than tyranny. Europe must take responsibility 
for its broader horizon. Across the globe, China has emerged as a systemic rival, and even 
the United States has displayed inconsistency as a reliable partner. Global and European 
challenges continue to surge. Meanwhile, individual EU member states’ influence in the 
international system has decreased, while the famous question ‘’Who do I call if I want to 
speak to Europe’’ remains as relevant as ever. Volt is committed to turning the EU into a 
strong pillar of a reformed multilateral system which speaks with one voice on the world’s 
stage.
 
The EU has the means to become a powerful, self-reliant, and positive global actor. A 
history of multilateral leadership, transformative enlargement rounds, and a globally 
competitive defence industrial base provide solid ground for more ambitious policies. A 
majority of European residents and citizens want to see the EU play a stronger role in their 
defence and representation, which would lead to greater security, diversity and prosperity 
for all its residents. This is why the EU should establish its Armed Forces equipped with a 
strong and unified defence industrial base. However, real strength can only come through 
awareness and taking responsibility. The EU should develop a progressive foreign policy 
culture that is self-reflective of its own historical legacies and public perceptions in other 
parts of the world. Through progressive trade and development policies, we will also build 
a more positive, attractive and horizontal relationship with the global majority.
To stand on solid footing in the world, the EU must also improve its societal resilience 
to hybrid threats against our economies, citizens and democracies, and improve security 
through civic participation. Many millions of people find inspiration in the EU and see it as 
their common future. Volt is committed to welcoming new Member States with open arms, 
to amplify its global sway and to advance the peaceful unification of Europe. A reformed 
and enlarged EU will foster stability on our continent and build our global influence to 
ultimately shape a more equitable, effective and legitimate multilateral system for all.
2. Foreign Affairs 
and Defence Act 
collaboration. Additionally, the 
EUMFA will develop an EU space 
strategy, enable cooperation on 
space exploration and lead the way 
towards establishing an international 
framework within the UN for 
collaboration in the civil exploration 
and peaceful use of the Moon, Mars, 
and other astronomical objects.
Cultivate a Common Diplomatic Culture 
both at the national and EUMFA levels, 
expanding the EU staff proportionally to 
seconded national staff and mandating 
the participation of all EU diplomatic staff 
(both national and EUMFA) in the European 
Diplomatic Academy and its training 
programs. 
Enhance Consular Services with the 
EUMFA manages bilateral representation 
and consular services for all EU Member 
States in third countries with no national 
diplomatic presence for those Member 
States. 
Create a proper Joint Intelligence Analysis 
Branch by empowering the EU Intelligence 
and Situation Centre (EU INTCEN) with the 
ability to collate and process intelligence 
gathered by member states and EUMFA 
delegations. It will also establish its 
intelligence-gathering capabilities, under 
effective parliamentary and judicial scrutiny 
to ensure compliance with human rights. EU 
INTCEN analyses will inform the decision-
making processes of joint EU foreign and 
security policies, including the identification 
of collective security threats and priorities.
1.	 One voice for the 
EU in the world
Restructure the European External Action 
Service (EEAS) by evolving the European 
External Action Service (EEAS) into the 
European Union Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs (EUMFA). This transformation will 
streamline and optimise the EU’s foreign 
affairs apparatus to enhance its efficiency, 
effectiveness, and global influence.
Divide the Role of the High Representative 
of the EU for Foreign Affairs and Security 
Policy (HRVP) into two distinct positions: 
an EU Minister of Foreign Affairs and 
an EU Minister of Defence. This division 
of responsibilities will bring about 
specialisation and focused leadership in 
their respective domains.
The newly established EUMFA, through the 
democratic mandate of a majority-elected 
European Government, will become the 
sole representative for the EU’s commonly 
formulated foreign policy position and its 
exercise in diplomacy, including bilateral 
and multilateral negotiations. The current 
setup needs to be more cohesive, thus more 
transparent, effective and consistent. The 
EUMFA mandate will focus on the following 
key missions:
Carry on political diplomacy. Thus, the 
EUMFA will be the EU’s representative 
on international cooperation, 
human rights, international justice, 
neighbourhood and enlargement, and 
humanitarian assistance.
Carry on science diplomacy. The 
EUMFA will notably support and 
promote climate and global health 
.
.
.
.
.
.
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP
.
.
21
Volt Europe


22
23
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP
Integrate Feminist Foreign Policy (FFP) 
within the EUMFA and Member States’ 
Ministries of Foreign Affairs. Internally, this 
will necessitate ensuring equal participation 
of women and other inter-sectionally 
disadvantaged groups within the EU’s 
diplomatic service, encompassing leadership 
roles. Externally, the EU will encourage 
equal participation in negotiations 
and peace agreements involving other 
international actors. EU delegations to 
international negotiations will be composed 
of FFP principles.
2. A progressive foreign 
policy culture
Build a strong conscience for colonial and 
imperial legacies of Member States in 
third countries in the European diplomatic 
corps that is reflected in the EU’s 
diplomacy towards these third countries 
by creating diverse and unified diplomatic 
representation, embodying a European 
voice. Highlight different backgrounds in 
Europe when building a structural dialogue 
with third countries based on equality and 
respect, aiming to move away from past 
paternalistic and exploitative legacies and 
combat resentment.
.
.
sectoral focuses and levels of engagement. 
EU enlargement should be a merit-based 
and open-door policy.
Provide Special Support for Nations 
Facing Foreign Aggression by developing 
a clear pre-prepared toolbox of options 
to provide support for countries seeking 
EU membership who are under hybrid 
or conventional threats with specific 
instruments to protect their sovereignty 
and territorial integrity, societal resilience 
and consistency of their EU accession 
pathway. Additionally, provides special 
long-term political, financial, and military 
commitments from the EU to protect 
Ukraine and secure its path towards EU 
accession. Financial assets seized through 
sanctions against Russia will be used to 
finance such aid, accession reforms and 
reconstruction.
Reform the EU to make it ready for 
enlargement most importantly, decision-
making procedures that currently require 
unanimity in the Council must be replaced 
with qualified majority voting (QMV) to 
avoid blockades by single Member State 
vetoes. Furthermore, the EU’s budget must 
be reformed to reflect the financial needs 
of an enlarged EU. The EU reform Volt 
envisions is detailed in our Reform the EU 
Act (Chapter 7).
3. A Vision for a Wider, Stronger 
and More Inclusive Union
Introduce a new enlargement methodology 
centred on gradual integration into the 
EU through stages, replacing the current 
‘’all or nothing’’ approach with a more 
efficient, transparent and fairer process.  
As candidate countries make progress in 
implementing reforms to align with the EU 
acquis, they will progressively gain greater 
access to EU resources like the EU budget 
and participation in EU institutions. These 
stages will be reversible in case of reform 
setbacks. The European Government 
(formerly the Commission) will monitor this 
process through quantified assessments, 
replacing the current qualitative method. 
Candidate countries must be able to 
understand the process and the evaluation 
of their progress fully and have means to 
appeal for scrutinization of decisions. The 
new system will accelerate the accession 
timelines of candidates through new 
incentives for reforms which will counter 
‘’enlargement fatigue’’ while improving 
the flexibility of the EU’s own ‘’absorption 
capacity’’.
Aligning EU enlargement with other 
non-EU organisations by making the new 
staged enlargement complementary with 
membership of other frameworks such as 
the European Political Community (EPC) and 
the Council of Europe. Membership of such 
organisations should not be an alternative 
to EU membership for aspiring candidates, 
but be complementary in terms of different 
.
.
.
.


24
25
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP
In the medium term, develop joint EU 
military capabilities by ensuring the Rapid 
Deployment Capacity (RDC) is ready for 
deployment by 2025, and further expanding 
it by adding more mission profiles, 
providing it with standing and harmonised 
equipment and EU staff. In addition, the 
EU should create a standing European 
Response Force (ERF) of 60,000 personnel 
equipped with the highest spectrum of 
land, air, naval and space assets. Its core 
purpose is as an initial intervention force 
to respond to threats to EU territorial 
integrity, complementing national 
militaries. This capability will be available 
with priority for the EU, and second priority 
for NATO. The EMA will train the personnel 
of the RDC and ERF.
Establish immediate EU joint military 
capabilities amongst a coalition of the 
willing by creating an agreement accessible 
to all EU members that constitutes a 
steering committee, with the necessary 
powers, which can establish integrated EU 
military units, where decisions are taken 
by a qualified majority and in coordination 
with NATO. Such units will be put under 
the authority of the reformed European 
Government as specified in Act 7. This will 
be a more rapid initial step towards the 
long-term EU-wide integration of armed 
forces, reflecting the urgency of the 
immediate need for an autonomous EU 
military capability amongst willing member 
states.
rights. Faced with these two models which 
have shown their limits and dangers, the 
EU can play a leading role in developing 
and promoting a “Strasbourg consensus” 
in multilateral institutions, based on the 
following principles:
A renegotiation of the debt of the 
least developed countries within 
the framework of the Paris Club 
(60 countries are in a state of debt 
distress).
The introduction of a new clause in 
loan contracts signed by developing 
countries automatically suspends their 
repayment in the event of a large-scale 
natural disaster.
An overhaul of the governance of 
international institutions, in particular, 
the recruitment of leaders of the 
World Bank and the IMF based on 
skills, and greater participation of 
representatives of civil society and 
NGOs in the governance bodies of 
these institutions.
Negotiated conditionalities, linked 
to the fight against corruption, 
respect for the rights of minorities, 
and policies for the promotion and 
protection of women.
Together, the 27 member countries 
and institutions of the European Union 
contribute $115 billion to Official 
Development Assistance (ODA), according 
to the 2022 OECD figures, double the 
amount of American aid. Currently, each 
member country manages its ODA effort 
within a national framework, according 
to its own geographic and thematic 
priorities. To strengthen their effectiveness, 
coherence and visibility, Volt proposes 
that funding and public development aid 
mechanisms be grouped at the European 
level within the framework of a “European 
Development Agency” with ad hoc financial 
and human resources and institutional 
arrangements. This transfer would give 
the EU a unique capacity to contribute 
to the achievement of the Sustainable 
Development Goals and an enhanced soft 
power capacity. 
The “Washington consensus” served until 
recently as a doctrine for the World Bank 
and the IMF which, in return for their loans, 
imposed on developing countries policies of 
liberalisation of public services and opening 
of their economies with effects sometimes 
catastrophic. For their part, China and its 
allies have developed a “Beijing consensus”, 
which emphasises the financing of 
infrastructure, without any consideration 
of the excessive debt over the beneficiary 
countries, nor of the essential principles of 
good governance and respect for human 
Reform and merge the EDA and the 
defence-industrial elements of the 
European Commission (e.g. DG DEFIS) 
into a European Ministry of Defence 
(EUMD) creating a centralised institution 
responsible for overseeing European 
defence efforts, including strategy, 
operations, research, procurement, and the 
Defence Technological and Industrial Base.
Establish a European Military Headquarters 
(EMHQ) responsible for drafting strategy 
and making key operational decisions 
regarding the operations of EU military 
units, particularly the RDC and ERF. It will 
operate under the EUMD and should be 
supported by a European Military Academy 
(EMA) which will educate, train and 
exchange a generation of personnel with a 
joint military culture.
In the short term, reinforce regional 
specialisation in specific branches (e.g. 
air, land, sea) and capabilities (e.g. 
cyber, amphibious, air assault). This 
will incentivise the development of 
comparative advantages and increase the 
cost-effectiveness and interoperability of 
EU militaries. At the same time, encourage 
and standardise best practices on regional 
integration of national units at the 
operational level, e.g. on the example of  
Franco-German and Dutch-German units. 
This will contribute to a shared military 
culture and operational effectiveness.
4. Reducing the global 
North-South economic divide
.
.
5. An autonomous military 
& civil defence capability
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.


26
27
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP
Expand the European Solidarity Corps into 
an ambitious voluntary EU civil and military 
service programme funded by the EU and 
complementary to existing national military 
and/or civil public services.
Create grassroots Initiatives for Resilience 
through a program aimed at supporting and 
financing grassroots initiatives dedicated 
to digital and civic resilience against hybrid 
threats. These initiatives will counteract 
activities such as election interference 
campaigns conducted by “troll factories” 
from third countries.
Create a European civil and military branch 
for disaster intervention expanding RescEU 
in scope and powers, modelled after the 
Spanish Unidad Militar de Emergencias 
and the German Technisches Hilfwerk, that 
intervenes in all types of man-made and 
natural disasters and catastrophes. We 
need to create the competencies in our 
societies to adapt to climate change and 
conflicts and a European military branch 
with civil society institutions across the 
Union would allow to building of “brand 
equity” for the European Armed Forces and 
distinguish the EU from other geopolitical 
actors by carrying a positive and defence-
oriented messaging.
.
.
.
Empower the EU Ministry of Defence 
to identify military capability needs and 
procure research, development, and supply 
of these capabilities in competitive tenders. 
Procurement shall equip the European 
armed forces with state-of-the-art military 
capabilities. To the extent that this primary 
objective is met, procurement should 
consider fostering economic development 
in economically underdeveloped regions of 
the EU. 
Radically increase the EU’s position as a 
global defence innovator by transforming it 
into a driving force for the development of 
emerging and disruptive strategic defence 
technologies. Existing efforts such as the 
EU Defence Innovation Scheme (EUDIS) and 
the Hub for EU Defence Innovation (HEDI) 
should be consolidated, and their mandate 
and funding increased. This initiative should 
focus on capability areas where the EU can 
achieve global competitiveness, such as the 
development of cyber, artificial intelligence, 
carbon-neutral (e.g. green hydrogen), 
quantum computing, and space defence 
technologies.
Consolidate EU Defence Funding (EDF) 
Instruments by merging existing separate 
EU funding instruments related to joint 
defence initiatives, including research and 
development and procurement. The EDF 
will become a permanent component of 
the Multiannual Financial Framework (MFF) 
6. Advancing the EU’s Defence 
Industrial Strategic Autonomy 
in the next budget cycle, receiving at least 
6% of the EU budget. Additionally, it will 
establish a new target, requiring at least 
60% of all defence spending by Member 
States to be allocated to collaborative 
projects.
Integrate the EU Defence Industry into 
the Internal Market phasing out national 
industrial protectionism and creating 
substantial economies of scale. It will be 
compensated by creating EU-regional 
defence industrial hubs (industries, 
education etc.) around leading countries, 
with participation from SMEs and 
companies in smaller neighbouring Member 
States. 
Develop Precise Common Rules for Arms 
Exports and ensure their strict and coherent 
enforcement for EU defence companies 
operating outside of the EU.
.
.
.
.
.


28
29
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP
Establish a Conventional Strike Capability 
to provide a broader range of options 
along the escalation ladder, minimising the 
reliance on nuclear deterrence whenever 
possible.
Adopt a whole-of-government approach 
to ensure EU resilience in times of peace, 
conflict and war, as well as in the “grey 
zone” between peace, conflict and war. 
Current EU policies focus primarily on 
promoting resilience as a framework to 
counter hybrid threats. Although this 
framework is valid, the EU must craft 
specific policies and measures to put this 
framework into practice effectively.
Integrate existing instruments (Cyber 
Diplomacy Toolbox, EU Hybrid Threats 
framework) to create a Hybrid Threats 
doctrine. That doctrine will build upon the 
Council of Europe’s Helsinki approach to 
mainstream a unified EU hybrid threats 
taxonomy and risk assessment. The first 
instalment of this framework will be cyber-
resilience under the Cyber Solidarity Act.
Empower the EU INTCEN to lead and 
implement the doctrine while creating 
a legal framework for intelligence 
sharing across the MS. The EU INTCEN 
will thus facilitate rapid and effective 
countermeasures and develop 
recommendations for improving joint civil-
military planning for hybrid contingencies. 
dependency minimisation on e.g. emerging 
technologies (AI, quantum computing), 
critical rare earth mineral value chains and 
semiconductors. On the example of the 
EU-US Trade and Technology Council (TTC) 
and the sustainable steel and aluminium 
club, institutionalise and deepen such 
efforts. Such efforts should help build a 
transatlantic ‘’Brussels Effect’’.
Develop a broader strategy for deeper 
engagement with other countries which 
share political norms, values and interests 
with the EU and NATO, including candidate 
countries for both, major non-NATO allies 
and regional organisations. This voluntary 
cooperation should include efforts to 
increase mutual deterrence, societal 
resilience, and political cooperation to 
strengthen the unity of democracies. 
The Summit for Democracy should be 
institutionalised as a forum for coordination 
with clear membership criteria and an open-
door policy.
Establish an EU-NATO Strategic 
Coordination Group, that is, a political 
steering body to facilitate structured, 
long-term cooperation between both 
entities. The Group will develop a Joint 
Strategic Document, outlining shared 
priorities, threat perceptions, capability 
requirements, force availability, and areas 
of specialisation (such as territorial defence 
VS hybrid resilience). It will also delineate 
regional and thematic roles, particularly 
concerning role divisions in Europe and 
the Indo-Pacific and address emerging and 
disruptive technologies critical to defence. 
Complementarity between Article 5 of 
NATO and Article 42.7 of the EU should also 
be clarified and planned for.
Continuing the task force on the resilience 
of critical infrastructure by taking concrete 
steps to ensure the effectiveness and 
resilience of critical infrastructure for the 
Euro-Atlantic military supply chain network, 
including submarine communications 
cables and infrastructure critical for energy 
supply and military mobility. EU and NATO 
candidates should also be included.
Increasing interdependence and therefore 
minimising risks of transatlantic political 
fallouts through joint integration on 
non-military initiatives. This would 
relate particularly to market integration, 
regulatory standard setting and strategic 
Promote the global prohibition of nuclear 
weapons, supporting the Treaty on the 
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons (TPNW) 
as a long-term strategy for global nuclear 
disarmament, conditional on its alignment 
with the fundamental necessity of 
maintaining a credible strategic deterrent, 
should the need persist.
Reduce global stocks of nuclear weapons, 
reflected both in the deployed warheads, 
and the retired/reserve ones. This would 
mitigate the verifiability problem, reduce 
the risk of human error leading to a 
(large-scale) nuclear strike and improve 
supervision effectiveness while reducing 
the risk of diversion.
Transfer of Control of the French nuclear 
deterrent under the political authority of 
the European Government following the 
adoption of a European Constitution and 
the establishment of fully democratic and 
accountable federal institutions. Over time, 
its personnel, systems, and procedures 
will be fully integrated into European 
structures.
Develop a Strategic Defence system, 
capable of effectively countering aerial 
threats to EU territory, including the 
capacity to respond to limited (ballistic) 
nuclear attacks.
.
.
.
.
7. A European pillar for NATO 
and an integrated democratic 
world
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
8. Ensuring a Comprehensive 
Strategic Deterrent 


30
31
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP
Adopt a Comprehensive Pandemic 
Accord, implementing a robust 
pandemic prevention, preparedness, and 
response framework with a mandate for 
comprehensive information gathering. 
Special attention will be devoted to 
bridging the health capacity gap in 
developing nations.
Restructure the Global Financial System, 
promoting inclusivity and fairness within 
the global financial system, mainly to 
effectively address climate financing for 
developing countries. Initiatives like the 
Paris Summit for a New Global Financing 
Pact will be integral. The ratification of a 
global minimum corporate tax rate will be 
expedited.
Establish New Own Resources for the UN, 
creating financial mechanisms such as a 
Global Resources Dividend (GRD) or Tobin 
Tax to fund and incentivize transitions 
aligned with the Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs) and distribute the financial 
burden at the UN more equitably.
Support a United Nations Parliamentary 
Assembly (UNPA), to strengthen the 
UN’s democratic legitimacy and create a 
precedent for representative democracy 
at the UN level which could be further 
expanded in its mandate and scope in 
the future, including overriding vetoes by 
United Nations Security Council (UNSC) 
permanent members. The UNPA should 
adopt a representative voting system, 
taking into consideration the population 
size of the Member States.
Reform the UNSC, In the short term, 
by adding additional permanent UNSC 
members and transferring the French 
permanent UNSC seat to an EU seat. In 
the long term, by abolishing permanent 
seats and instituting a regular election 
for UNSC seats by the General Assembly 
(later the UNPA) from a pool of regional 
groupings. The UNSC should increase the 
total number of seats to better reflect 
regional, economic, and population 
diversity, including by granting seats 
to regional organisations. In addition, 
Qualified Majority Voting should replace 
unanimity for matters related to genocide, 
crimes against humanity, or war crimes, 
including resolutions legitimizing military 
interventions
31
Volt Europe
31
Volt Europe
.
.
.
.
.
.
9. Championing a Reformed 
Multilateral System
The first instalment of the capability will 
be on cyber-resilience under the Cyber 
Solidarity Act. Capability development 
will also focus on facilitating processes of 
public-private continuity management in 
critical infrastructures.
Define a threshold of cumulative or non-
cumulative hybrid threats where the mutual 
defence clause (Art. 42(7) TEU) may be 
invoked and define the means of response 
that are authorised (conventional, non-
conventional). In addition, the relevant 
bodies will clarify the division of labour 
about attributing and countering hybrid 
threats between Integrated Political Crisis 
Response (IPCR) arrangements, the Hybrid 
Fusion Cell within the EU INTCEN and 
the EUMFA (DG DEFIS, EEAS during the 
transition period).


32
33
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP
The Union’s Common Foreign and Security 
Policy (CFSP) is based, inter alia, on Articles 21-
46 of the TEU as well as Articles 205-222 of the 
TFEU. In the field of CFSP, the EU is currently 
vested with special legislative competencies 
which include specific institutional features, 
such as the limited participation of the 
European Parliament in the decision-making 
procedure. CFSP is currently defined and 
implemented by the European Council as well 
as the Council of the European Union. 
To implement the policies of the Act, there is a 
legal need for Treaty changes. These changes 
include the establishment of shared legislative 
competencies to allow the Union to introduce 
common standards by law. Policies such as 
“one voice for the EU in the world’’ require 
a broad rethinking of the existing legislative 
framework. This includes the restructuring of 
the European External Action Service (EEAS) 
into a European Union Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs (EUMFA) as well as the division of the 
role of the High Representative of the EU for 
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy (HRVP) 
into two positions, namely an EU Minister of 
Foreign Affairs and an EU Minister of Defence. 
To realise this policy, Treaty changes are 
Costs and Income of the 
proposals included in the Act
How we will Pursue this Act in 
the European Parliament
suggested, including, inter alia, Title III of the 
TEU “provision on the institutions”, Title V of 
the TEU “general provisions on the Union’s 
External Action and specific provision on the 
common foreign and security policy”, Title V 
of the TFEU on “international agreements’’ 
as well as the Declaration concerning the 
common foreign and security policy. In addition, 
subsequent legislation including binding legal 
acts such as a Decision are required to establish 
and further define the role of the Ministers. 
Furthermore, Volt strives to advance the 
EU’s defence industrial strategic autonomy 
by enhancing the EU’s position as a global 
defence innovator. To consolidate and enhance 
efforts such as the EU Defence Innovation 
Scheme (EUDIS) and the Hub for EU Defence 
Innovation (HEDI) there is a need for change 
and update of the existing secondary law, such 
as Regulation (EU) 2021/697 establishing the 
European Defence Fund. Moreover, policies 
strengthening and innovating the role of the 
Union in the global context require advocating 
principles such as feminist foreign policies 
within the existing framework of NATO and the 
United Nations as well as in new bilateral and 
multilateral agreements.
The total costs of this Act, which consist of 
the implementation costs and the annual 
costs for five years, is € 447.460.000.000.  The 
implementation costs are € 49.626.000.000 and 
the annual costs are € 199.330.000.000.
Examples of implementation costs in the 
Moonshot Program are the policy and legal 
framework development, the capacity building 
and training of (new) staff, the building of IT 
or physical infrastructure, or public awareness 
campaigns.
Examples of annual costs are salaries and 
benefits, administrative costs, infrastructure 
maintenance, or the costs associated with the 
running of the proposed policies.
The total costs of the complete Moonshot 
Program are mentioned separately from the 
total income.


35
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
QUALITY OF LIFE
34
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
QUALITY OF LIFE	
34
Guarantee equal access to workplace 
opportunities without discrimination and 
sanction enterprises that do not comply 
with inclusive employment.
Introduce an EU anti-discrimination law that 
extends the existing protection in the area 
of employment to other areas such as social 
security, education and the supply of goods 
and services, including housing.
Push for the ratification of the Istanbul 
Convention by the remaining Member 
States and its full implementation by the EU 
and all Member States.
Strengthen sanctions against hate crimes, 
including against hate speech and digital 
violence, by expanding the definitions of 
such offences.
Provide free access to menstrual hygiene 
products for all.
Strongly encourage Member States to 
ban conversion therapy, depathologise 
transgender identities, enable trans people 
to have their gender legally recognised 
in a simple administrative procedure, and 
guarantee gender-affirming healthcare for 
LGBTQIA+ people.
Ensure that the Fundamental Rights of 
LGBTQIA+ people and the respective ECJ 
and ECHR rulings (e.g., on recognition of 
same-sex partnership and marriage, legal 
gender recognition for trans people, and 
Freedom of Expression) are respected in 
practice throughout the EU. Ensure that 
parents in rainbow families are recognised 
as such throughout the EU (e.g. when 
moving to another Member State).
Create EU funding schemes that are 
directly accessible by civic, social or political 
organisations to promote constructive 
dialogue initiatives between divergent 
views on LGBTQIA+ rights and other 
contentious topics that are fuelling a social 
divide within Europe.
Commit to fighting antisemitism. Educate 
all citizens about Jewish culture and 
history, including historical persecution 
and the responsibility arising from the 
Shoah. Further, develop the EU strategy 
for combating antisemitism in cooperation 
with the Jewish community to defend 
Jews and Jewish institutions in Europe and 
globally so that they can feel safe. Promote 
respectful exchange and cooperation as 
part of an inclusive society.
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
QUALITY OF LIFE
Volt Europe
Europe prides itself on being a region of openness, democracy and freedom. It enjoys some of the highest 
levels of prosperity and abundance in the world. Yet, despite progress, it remains a continent divided. Millions 
of people are sidelined or excluded from the opportunities they need to build the lives they deserve. In 
addition to staggering income inequality, Europeans constantly confront barriers to success and well-being in 
the form of discrimination, the normative structuring of society, neglected infrastructure and sub-par public 
services.
According to the European Commission, ‘most indicators of well-being [in Europe] display a social gradient 
according to education level, occupation, income and social status. Educational persistence has not changed 
substantially across birth cohorts, suggesting that limited progress has been made in ensuring equal 
opportunities.’
Underinvestment in key public services and infrastructure has meant that people endure needless burdens, 
such as exorbitant housing costs, the lack of reliable and accessible transportation, poor access to healthcare, 
and schooling that fails to equip young people with the skills they need to thrive. Meanwhile, an estimated 
150 million Europeans are living with a mental health condition. Discrimination based on gender, sexuality, 
ethnic background or disability remains prevalent, stifling the life chances of millions. The EU scores just 70.2 
out of 100 according to the EU’s Gender Equality Index, reflecting women’s continued exclusion from political 
decision-making and unequal treatment in the workplace.
Human rights are under threat, with attacks on reproductive rights and a rise in hate crimes against 
LGBTQIA+ people. More than half of disabled people report having experienced discrimination, though many 
more have been discriminated against through an inherently ableist system. Furthermore, a digital divide has 
left many at a disadvantage, while the harmful effects of social media threaten the safety and well-being 
of all. Social injustices and inequality have, in turn, led to the rise of populist forces attuned to the justified 
discontent of Europe’s people. Enabling people to fulfil their potential and lead meaningful lives is therefore 
not only a social and economic good but a tool to defeat far-right populism.
Through the ‘Thriving Together Act’, we will harness the resources and wealth Europe already has to provide 
its citizens with the opportunities they need to flourish. We will ensure that factors such as geography, socio-
economic status, gender, ethnic background and disability no longer act as brakes on a person’s wellbeing. 
The provision of essential services, along with the elimination of barriers to education, work and other 
opportunities, will allow future generations to have equal chances to shape their own lives. The Act takes a 
holistic approach to tackling the social injustices that remain prevalent in European society. From education 
and access to work to healthcare, reproductive rights and digital rights, it will provide the means to create a 
Union that works for all its citizens, not just those privileged by circumstance. 
3. Thriving 
Together Act
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
1. Promoting inclusivity 
and fighting discrimination
35
Volt Europe


36
37
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
QUALITY OF LIFE	
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
QUALITY OF LIFE
Press Member States to create clear 
roadmaps out of the institutional model, 
deploying the personal assistance services 
necessary for disabled people to actively 
participate in society.
Incorporate the CRPD as a binding standard 
into the EU’s legal framework, recognising 
the CRPD’s General Comments as the 
authoritative guidance to interpretation, in 
line with the resolution of 18 June 2020 on 
the post-2020 European disability strategy, 
and allow for its direct referral by European 
citizens with disabilities.
Compel remaining Member States to ratify 
the optional protocol to the UN Convention 
of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
(CRPD) and create a European Disability 
Agency that ensures the harmonised 
implementation of these rights.
Abolish discriminatory protection regimes 
such as guardianship, which deny legal 
capacity for people with disabilities, by 
supporting the implementation of new 
supported decision-making (SDM) models.
Immediately cease all use of European 
funds to finance the construction of new 
institutions for disabled people within the 
EU and in third countries. 
.
.
.
.
.
2. Rights of Persons 
with Disabilities
Promote access to free, high-quality 
daycare and preschool programmes for 
every child from an early age.
Support the development of an inclusive 
and high-quality educational system that 
is free of charge, accessible, and offers 
every child the opportunity to achieve their 
potential, including by providing extra 
educational support for teachers and extra 
social support for children with all kinds of 
disabilities.
Equip young people for modern life 
and the labour market, by proposing 
interdisciplinary school curricula that focus 
on key skills including English language 
competence, STEAM subjects supported 
by digital resources, citizenship education, 
and participatory skills such as inclusivity, 
sustainability, gender equality, mental 
health, media literacy and critical thinking 
(see also the ‘Good Jobs and Shared 
Prosperity Act’).
Attract and retain qualified educators 
and improve their reputation and working 
conditions by reforming teacher training 
and pay structures to reflect the vital 
role educators play, providing ongoing 
psychological support, and involving 
teachers in shaping education policy.
Ensure our university system is low or no 
tuition-fee-based and offers sufficient 
financial support for any student who needs 
it.
Develop extensive (re-)training and allow 
each person to get lifelong learning and 
easier pathways to change careers.
Promote, support the development of, 
and expand the accredited European 
School system into a comprehensive offer, 
including vocational training, to ensure free 
access to multilingual, flexible, high-quality, 
inclusive and internationally competitive 
education for every child in Europe.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
3. Lifelong education for 
social mobility


38
39
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
QUALITY OF LIFE	
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
QUALITY OF LIFE
Propose an inclusive, standardised, Europe-
wide SRHR school curriculum, reflecting the 
variety of sexual and romantic orientations 
and gender identities, in line with UNESCO 
guidelines.
Press for the inclusion of SRHR in the EU 
Treaties and of the right to abortion in the 
EU Charter of Fundamental Rights.
Harmonise prevention programmes and 
public health systems through the European 
Health Union.
Implement EU-wide solutions for capacity, 
costs and reimbursement to ensure that all 
European residents have access to first-rate 
public healthcare.
Initiate a recruitment drive to ensure an 
adequate number of healthcare workers in 
all spheres of health and community care.
Make abortion on request accessible in law 
and practice across the EU by removing all 
undue burdens and barriers to accessing 
and providing abortion care.
Ensure that all forms of contraception are 
provided free of charge or reimbursed by 
insurance for all people regardless of age.
Ensure that measures to prevent sexually 
transmitted diseases (STDs), such as HIV-
PrEP and anonymous testing, are made 
available, accessible and free. 
Criminalise forced sterilisation and forced 
contraception.
Strive to make the digital systems that are 
already integrated into healthcare systems 
more human-centred (see the ‘Empowering 
Europe’s Path to Prosperity Act’).
Recognise oral health as a human right 
and public health priority, and develop 
and implement comprehensive oral health 
policies and strategies at the EU and 
national levels.
.
.
.
.
.
4. Strengthening European 
public health
.
.
.
.
.
.
5. Family planning and inclusive 
reproductive health and rights


40
41
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
QUALITY OF LIFE	
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
QUALITY OF LIFE
Improve digital mental well-being with 
EU-wide legislation that protects workers’ 
right to disconnect outside of office hours 
and educates children on the healthy use of 
digital technology.
Promote healthy ageing and develop 
community engagement by introducing a 
network of community volunteers.
Support the development of a European 
network of community mental health 
services based on WHO guidance.
7. Social solidarity and 
community
Decriminalise sex work and ensure that 
systems of regulation reflect the needs 
of sex workers, including ensuring the 
existence of safe working places.
Ensure that sex workers receive insurance, 
healthcare and other standard protections.
Address violence and trafficking and ensure 
access for sex workers to channels of legal 
protection and redress.
.
.
.
6. Decriminalizing and 
regulating sex work
Establish a highly qualified school health 
system to identify early symptoms of 
mental suffering. 
Provide child protection services with 
mental health professionals to bridge the 
gap between child protection and mental 
health care.
Counter the stigma around mental illness 
by educating children and adults about 
psychiatric conditions and discrimination.
.
.
.
.
.
.


42
43
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
QUALITY OF LIFE	
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
QUALITY OF LIFE
Encourage employers, school boards and 
training institutions to invest in reducing 
psychosocial risks like stress, violence and 
harassment, by integrating this into their 
management protocols.
Deliver services for harm reduction while 
decriminalising addicted people and 
supporting those who are suffering.
.
.
.
8. Tackling psychosocial risks
Optimise care and cure for youths in 
trouble by introducing low-threshold 
services where youngsters can meet with 
professionals and fellow sufferers.
Encourage denser urban planning and 
efficient land use to reduce urban 
sprawl, thereby reducing carbon 
emissions, improving health and 
minimising disease, hospitalisation and 
death;
Make affordable and accessible 
local transportation a reality for all 
Europeans through the creation of 
comprehensive and reliable urban and 
suburban rail networks;
Employ best spatial planning practices 
to minimise crime and maximise safety, 
including establishing ‘community 
safety hubs’ dispersed throughout 
public spaces, staffed by trained 
personnel to assist and support those 
encountering harassment or feeling 
vulnerable.
Support and fund innovative housing 
models, such as co-housing, rent-to-own and 
lifelong renting programmes, to reduce the 
concentration of housing wealth and ease 
the financial barriers to home ownership.
Adopt and enforce WHO guidelines on air 
pollution exposure and residential green 
space availability in line with our ‘Health 
Ecosystems Act’. 
Dedicate European funds to the 
development of green infrastructure, the 
enhancement of public spaces, and the 
realisation of the “15-minute city”, making 
basic needs and services available in all 
communities reachable by active or public 
transport.
Empower the EU to provide direct funding 
to cities to support them, independent of 
potential sanctions to the country. Set up 
a best practice sharing system for cities to 
discuss, among other issues, how to:
Fund the creation of liveable cities and 
towns, accessible to all, with vibrant 
social gathering spots, green spaces 
and recreational activities;
Promote active transportation like 
walking and cycling, and guarantee 
safe infrastructure, reducing traffic 
fatalities;
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
9. Affordable and accessible 
housing and vibrant cities


44
45
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
QUALITY OF LIFE	
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
QUALITY OF LIFE
Establish a comprehensive high-speed 
rail network connecting all EU cities with 
populations exceeding 100,000 residents, 
encompassing high-speed and sleeper trains 
and contributing to increased individual 
freedom and comfort, climate resilience 
efforts, public health and economic 
prosperity.
Task the ETA with pushing innovation and 
sustainability in the aviation and shipping 
industries. 
Create a European Transport Authority 
(ETA), with consultative legislative 
authority and financial resources, to shift 
responsibilities to the European level. The 
ETA will oversee investments in cross-
border and high-speed rail infrastructure 
across Europe, closing existing gaps in rail 
connectivity. 
Establish a unified rail ticketing platform 
where any railway user can input two 
stations in Europe, get a route and book 
a ticket. The platform must also keep 
rail users appraised of real-time delays, 
costs, cancellations and the appropriate 
passenger rights that apply. The platform 
should include an open-access API, follow 
UIC MERITS and cover all (inter)national and 
cross-border trains.
.
.
.
.
10. Improving train travel
Provide dedicated funding for awareness-
raising campaigns to enable people to 
understand how newly enforced EU 
legislation impacts their fundamental rights 
and freedoms.
Collaborate with existing oversight bodies 
in Member States and civil society to ensure 
legal requirements are upheld.
Transform the Declaration on European 
Digital Rights and Principles for the Digital 
Decade into a binding legal instrument, so 
that the Declaration is upheld at every step 
of policy making.
Promote a mandatory opinion by the 
European Parliament’s LIBE committee for 
each regulatory proposal on digital matters 
to guarantee that fundamental rights and 
freedoms are accounted for in the text.
Provide dedicated funding for 
representation to ensure people residing in 
the EU can bring violators to justice.
.
.
.
.
.
11. Protecting digital rights


46
47
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
QUALITY OF LIFE	
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
QUALITY OF LIFE
46
Volt Europe
Set up cross-border innovation teams, 
create a central “EU IT Traineeship 
Initiative” and introduce EU-sponsored 
skills certifications, boosting inter-EU 
collaboration and elevating the digital 
prowess of public sector employees.
Ensure offline availability of digital services, 
for example by staff guiding citizens 
through digital processes.
Support administrative best practice 
sharing and mutual support services across 
EU countries to ensure governments 
redesign processes from scratch when 
digitising them, ensuring their goals are 
met efficiently and citizens can understand 
and follow them easily, with clear timelines 
and outcomes.
Where appropriate, transition to paperless 
processes in both EU institutions and 
Member States, adopting harmonised ICT 
standards and offering multi-device friendly 
services. 
Roll out the EU Digital Identity Wallet, 
which should be able to digitally store an EU 
ID, national ID and other public certificates 
from all Member States, while ensuring user 
control, decentralised data storage and 
robust data protection.
Article 2 of the TEU enshrines the values 
of respect for human dignity, freedom, 
democracy, and equality. All European 
legislation should be based on these principles 
and foster their implementation into the 
lives of all EU citizens and people living in the 
European Union.
The Thriving Together Act addresses the 
subjects of health, inclusivity, education, 
digitalisation, and social equality. Many of 
which the European Union cannot legally 
regulate since the legislative competencies 
lie with the Member States. To implement 
the positive changes that are promoted by 
this act, Volt suggests a Treaty change to 
make Public and Human Health and Education 
shared legislative competencies, allowing 
the European Union to introduce common 
standards by law. Furthermore, to achieve 
the ambitious objectives set out by this act, 
new European legislation is needed and will 
be addressed by Volt within the European 
Parliament. Combining and updating existing 
anti-discrimination Directives for clearer 
arrangements and transparency (Directive 
2000/43/EC, Directive 2000/78/EC, Directive 
2006/54/EC, Directive 2004/113/EC) and 
working towards an “EU Anti-Discrimination 
law” that includes the rights of LGBTQIA+ 
people and protects the rights of all people 
.
.
.
.
.
12. Digital Government
How we will pursue this act in 
the European Parliament
living in the European Union is a necessary step 
to foster equality. People with disabilities need 
adequate legal protection inter alia through the 
proposal of a Directive on deinstitutionalisation 
that implements a Europe-wide plan to 
guarantee independent living for those 
diagnosed with a mental disorder or 
developmental disability. Volt will be working 
towards introducing a law that regulates sex 
work in all Member States, decriminalising 
workers and providing them with adequate 
protection. To reflect changes such as 
digitalisation and working from home Directive 
2019/1152 on transparent and predictable 
working conditions needs to be amended. 
The adaptation to a digitalised world will be 
achieved by working towards a new European 
eGovernment Action Plan that includes policies 
and actions on government process redesign, 
transition to paperless processes, adaptation 
of harmonized ICT standards and multi-device 
friendly services. Furthermore, to ensure that 
the development of the Interoperable Europe 
Act (2022/0379 (COD)) takes an inclusive 
approach to stakeholder involvement, Volt 
advocates for the final act representing our 
principles, digital rights, open data and Free 
Libre Open Source Software (FLOSS).


48
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
QUALITY OF LIFE	
49
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
QUALITY OF LIFE
49
Volt Europe
Incomes, on average, have been growing in Europe over the last decades. However, they have not 
done so fast enough and not to the benefit of everyone. Productivity gains have also been slowing, 
showing the same uneven distribution. As a result, large inequalities persist across the EU, both 
locally and bloc-wide. Such a two-tier labour market means that some workers have safe and stable 
jobs, while others work with fewer rights and in unprotected workplaces. 
 
At the same time, areas with large potential for sustainable growth have witnessed severe skill 
shortages that hold back potential and hinder the labour force participation of young people and 
women, who additionally face a persistent gender gap in well-paying jobs and carry the larger burden 
of unpaid housework. 
 
Many vacant jobs exist and remain unfilled due to their poor working conditions, with labour 
protections and workplace rights enforced unevenly across Member States. These inequalities 
undermine the well-being of workers and hinder the establishment of a cohesive cross-border social 
fabric. 
 
The glaring absence of sufficient European social cohesion mechanisms further exacerbates the 
situation, preventing the pooling of resources and efforts necessary for tackling shared challenges. 
Consequently, poverty continues to persist at concerningly high rates, tarnishing the EU’s reputation 
as a bastion of prosperity and equality. Yet, these challenges are not insurmountable. They are self-
made. 
By creating a highly productive, fair, and meaningful work environment for all citizens we can 
promote the creation of a European Social Union that supports all Europeans and guarantees their 
rights. Harnessing technologies such as automation, AI and green technologies will boost labour 
productivity, resulting in new types of jobs, higher wages, and reduced working hours. Ensuring 
that EU citizens have the skills and education necessary for these technologies will guarantee their 
adoption to the benefit of workers. Remote work can unlock the full potential of the European 
labour market and robust workers’ rights will guarantee fair wages and working conditions for all 
workers, harmonising standards across the bloc. 
Finally, to end tax competition between Member States and facilitate the harmonisation of taxation, 
we propose to define a common minimum EU tax base for direct taxation.
4. Good Jobs and 
Shared Prosperity 
Act
The total costs of this Act, which consist of the 
implementation costs and the annual costs 
for five years, is € 2.864.062.000.000.  The 
implementation costs are € 1.295.637.500.000 
and the annual costs are € 313.684.900.000.
Examples of implementation costs in the 
Moonshot Program are the policy and legal 
framework development, the capacity building 
and training of (new) staff, the building of IT 
or physical infrastructure, or public awareness 
campaigns.
Examples of annual costs are salaries and 
benefits, administrative costs, infrastructure 
maintenance, or the costs associated with the 
running of the proposed policies.
The total costs of the complete Moonshot 
Program are mentioned separately from the 
total income.
Costs and Income of the 
proposals included in the Act
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAM POLICY PROPOSALS
QUALITY OF LIFE	
48
Volt Europe


50
51
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
QUALITY OF LIFE	
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
QUALITY OF LIFE
Incentivise Member States to reduce 
the number of deductions in favour of 
lower income tax rates and to shrink 
the number of taxes to promote 
simplicity while ensuring citizens have 
dignified lives with the European Basic 
Income.
Define and enforce, in coordination 
with Member States, regionally 
adjusted minimum wage standards or 
a high level of union coverage, which 
ensures the European Basic Income 
cannot be exploited.
Harmonise taxation processes so 
that people have fewer barriers to 
work and living in multiple different 
European countries.
Ensure a common EU tax base for 
direct national taxes by introducing 
EU-wide minimum effective rates for 
gift, inheritance, and wealth taxation, 
using the European Central Financial 
Wealth Data Register (see Empowering 
Europe’s Path to Prosperity Act).
Develop a truly European Social Union, 
leveraging the establishment of the new 
EU Ministry of Finance (see Empowering 
Europe’s Path to Prosperity and Reform 
the EU Acts) as a coordinating institution, 
and a tripled EU budget which provides 
investments, addresses social imbalances, 
and shields against economic downturns:
Create a European Basic Income 
(EBI), modelled after a negative 
tax system, where people earning 
below a certain income threshold 
receive payments instead of paying 
taxes. This provides a safety net and 
incentivises work to support people 
in escaping poverty traps. Have the 
EU’s Ministry of Finance make such 
payments from the EU budget, cost-
adjusting to each region to at least 
500 Purchasing Power Standards, 
which is an income sufficient to cover 
basic living expenses. The principles 
of EBI (European Basic Income) are 
necessary to harmonise and execute 
by the member states to reach a truly 
European union. The legal fundament 
for EBI is already binding for all 
member states by the TFEU (Treaty 
and Functioning of the European 
Union) article 107, concerning state 
aid.
.
1.	 A Truly European 
Social Union
.
.
.
.
.
Align social systems across the EU by 
harmonising systems of pensions, sick leave, 
unemployment insurance, and childcare 
benefits. 
Ensure universal childcare, shared parental 
leave, and transferable pension rights. 
.
.
2.	European welfare 
for all


52
53
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
QUALITY OF LIFE	
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
QUALITY OF LIFE
Establish ethical recruitment policies and 
principles. This can include bans on abusive 
practices and recruitment fees, as well 
as improving access to information for 
workers, including labour and trade union 
rights, complaints and redress mechanisms.
Establish a protected right to be offline 
outside of working hours.
Harmonise European labour law, with an 
exemplary European default work contract.
Enforce the protection of the rights of 
gig workers by requiring Member States 
to protect them either in the same way 
as individuals in full-time employment 
or create similar protections in terms of 
health, pension, and unemployment.
Actively enforce the Blue Book Rights of 
workers across the continent, creating 
a European mechanism for monitoring 
workplace abuses, both for citizens as well 
as migrants.
Incentivise the introduction of gender 
equality measures. 
.
.
.
.
.
.
3.	Protection of 
workers’ rights
Update regulations so that it becomes 
legally and fiscally simple to work remotely 
from anywhere in the EU.
Institute special regulations to protect the 
right of remote workers to disconnect.
Require employers to accept the request 
for remote work from employees, unless a 
reasonable and fair reason can be provided 
as to why it should not take place.
.
.
.
4.	Protecting remote work


54
55
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
QUALITY OF LIFE	
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
QUALITY OF LIFE
To enhance European productivity 
through locally produced sustainable 
consumer goods and enhance the 
value of technical education, we 
suggest establishing European 
Secondary Schools focused on 
craftsmanship, backed by EU funding 
and industry expertise, nurturing 
students aged 10 to 12 towards trade 
skills, internships, specialisation, and 
a final masterwork, aiming to provide 
technically gifted students with an 
appealing educational path devoid of 
academic stigma.
Align the EU approach to education with 
the promotion of STEAM subjects and “Life 
competencies and responsibility” subjects 
in the Thriving Together Act:
 Create a special program introducing 
entrepreneurship and financial literacy 
education in schools EU-wide.
Increase focus on developing digital 
skills in elementary and secondary 
schools within the EU, such as the 
already named media literacy in 
the Thriving Together Act, but also 
basic IT skills, information skills and 
computational thinking (including 
understanding how AI works), by 
renewing the commitment and 
accelerating the timeline of the ‘Digital 
Education Action Plan’.
.
5.	21st Century Education
.
.
.
Establish a European Skills Fund to:
Subsidise on-the-job training for 
incumbent workers in firms that 
adopt new green technologies and 
automation technologies.
Provide all Europeans with one grant 
every three years to be spent on 
accredited retraining schools in a dual 
system of classroom and on-the-job 
training/apprenticeships. 
.
6.	Reskilling and retraining
.
.


56
57
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
QUALITY OF LIFE	
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
QUALITY OF LIFE
Democratise the workplace by requiring 
worker participation in boards of large 
companies.
Promote unionisation by protecting the 
right to collective bargaining and lifting 
barriers to entry for new and accountable 
unions and forms of representation
Create a harmonised status for cooperative 
companies so that they receive 
administrative support and tax incentives. 
Promote this status in key sectors of the 
economy to ensure the financial capital 
stays within the EU market.
The European economy should not exist as an 
end in itself but as a guarantee for prosperity 
and economic security for all citizens of the 
European Union. The legislative framework 
of the European Union needs to reflect the 
objective of shared prosperity and economic 
security more strongly by creating and changing 
legislation as proposed by this act.
The act expresses the legal ambitions for a 
European Basic income, an EU-tax reform, 
a European minimum wage and collective 
bargaining and a European Social Union. The 
establishment of a European Basic Income 
requires far-reaching amendments as the EU 
is currently not vested with direct authority 
over social security. Article 153 TFEU permits 
the European Parliament to adopt supportive 
measures regarding the achievement of 
fundamental social rights. A new protocol 
could grant the EU competence to develop 
and fund a basic income system. A harmonized 
EU tax base for gift and inheritance taxation 
and wealth taxation as well as minimum rates 
can be achieved by adopting directives similar 
to the VAT Directives. Implementing EU taxes 
necessitates, among others, amending Article 
311 TFEU, which deals with the European 
Union’s own resources system. A Treaty change 
is necessary to enable direct tax collection by 
.
.
.
7.	 Democracy in 
the workplace 
How we will pursue this act in 
the European Parliament
the European Union. Therefore, we support 
the Parliament’s call to open the EU Treaties 
via a convention composed of representatives 
of the national Parliaments, the heads of state 
or government of the Member States, of the 
European Parliament and of the Commission 
who examine the proposal for a Treaty change. 
Here, we will make sure that the European 
Union receives the competence to collect taxes 
and issue debt. Potential indirect taxes, such 
as digital or carbon taxes, could be outlined in 
a new protocol with the unanimous consent 
of the Member States. The Directive (EU) 
2022/2041 on adequate minimum wages in the 
European Union already exists but needs to be 
strengthened. To establish European minimum 
wages and enable cross-border collective 
bargaining, Article 153 TFEU is employed. 
This provision allows for coordinated action 
on working conditions and social protection. 
Amending the TFEU to include a new chapter 
explicitly addressing social Union objectives 
and principles would allow for the deepening 
of social policy integration. This would provide 
a legal framework for cooperation while 
respecting Member States’ autonomy.	


58
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
QUALITY OF LIFE	
59
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
HUMANE MIGRATION
59
Volt Europe
Asylum seekers and refugees in Europe endure distressing conditions due to delayed decisions, 
inhumane reception conditions, mass detention and exclusion at EU borders. The distribution 
of asylum seekers among Member States remains contentious, leaving vulnerable individuals in 
legal limbo.
The current system is dysfunctional, forcing asylum seekers onto unsafe irregular routes. 
Violations of EU law by European border agencies and limited search and rescue missions 
exacerbate the disorganisation. Consequently, EU Member States’ obscure deals with 
autocratic regimes near their borders are not a viable solution and contribute to unnecessary 
deaths.
The urgency for change is magnified by global displacement on an unprecedented scale, 
driven by various factors including armed conflicts, persecution and environmental disasters. 
However, most refugees from Africa and Asia seek refuge in neighbouring countries, not 
Europe. Volt recognises that although the EU’s refugee population is a small fraction of its 
total, it still contributes to the multicultural and diverse fabric of European societies. 
To address these challenges, Europe needs an efficient, fair and humane system. The Asylum 
Seekers and Refugees Act offers concrete solutions to address the challenge of integrating 
asylum seekers and refugees. It establishes common, swift and fair asylum procedures and 
reception conditions to ensure humane treatment.
To ease the disproportionate burden on border Member States and ensure that people are 
placed in environments where they can rebuild their lives, this act introduces a fair relocation 
system triggered upon arrival, which distributes asylum seekers evenly within the boundaries 
of objective criteria, while considering personal preferences. Immediate access to social, legal, 
medical and psychological assistance is prioritised. Subsequently, it promotes immediate 
integration and empowerment of refugees and asylum-seekers, recognising their potential to 
contribute to society. 
Furthermore, this Act emphasises protecting the human rights of vulnerable individuals by 
establishing safe regular pathways for refugees and monitoring violations of those rights. 
By the same token, legally recognizing climate refugees upholds human rights and promotes 
a forward-looking approach to addressing the challenges of climate-induced displacement. 
Meanwhile, through the establishment of additional regular channels for labour migration, as 
discussed in the labour migration act, the influx of asylum seekers to Europe is reduced.  
This Act improves conditions for asylum seekers in the EU and addresses concerns outside EU 
borders, focusing on root causes and reception improvements in the region.
5. Asylum Seekers 
and Refugees Act
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
QUALITY OF LIFE	
The total costs of this Act, which consist of the 
implementation costs and the annual costs 
for five years, is € 1.290.559.000.000.  The 
implementation costs are € 20.929.000.000 and 
the annual costs are € 253.926.000.000.
Examples of implementation costs in the 
Moonshot Program are the policy and legal 
framework development, the capacity building 
and training of (new) staff, the building of IT 
or physical infrastructure, or public awareness 
campaigns.
Examples of annual costs are salaries and 
benefits, administrative costs, infrastructure 
maintenance, or the costs associated with the 
running of the proposed policies.
The total costs of the complete Moonshot 
Program are mentioned separately from the 
total income.
Costs and Income of the 
proposals included in the Act
58
Volt Europe


60
61
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
HUMANE MIGRATION	
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
HUMANE MIGRATION
Provide refuge and protection under the 
Geneva Convention, and refuse external 
agreements that might compromise 
refugees’ well-being or infringe upon their 
human rights. Invest further in international 
instruments, like the Global Refugee Forum, 
to cooperate constructively with third 
countries, the UNHCR, academics, and other 
voluntary refugee organisations. 
Support decentralised asylum procedures in 
final destinations where integration efforts 
are possible during the asylum process. 
Do not outsource asylum applications to 
remote locations or even third countries. 
Support the EU’s commitment to human 
rights and its international obligations and 
ensure the integrity of the asylum-seeking 
process within the EU. 
.
.
.
1. Right to seek asylum
Support the collaboration among 
governments, international organisations, 
and NGOs for identifying and offering 
reception to vulnerable individuals, either 
during crises or as a long-term solution to 
displacement challenges.
Establish regular pathways to the EU 
and end the massive losses of lives in 
the Mediterranean and the Atlantic by 
simplifying visa processes, the provision of 
humanitarian visas and resettlement.
Make use of prima facie recognition and 
temporary protection mechanisms.
Create humanitarian corridors to provide 
safe and regular passage to vulnerable 
individuals, who often resort to dangerous 
and irregular routes.
.
.
.
.
2. Safe and regular pathways 
for refugees


62
63
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
HUMANE MIGRATION	
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
HUMANE MIGRATION
Build a system through which children are 
never detained.
Ensure a unified database accessible to 
both national authorities and EU agencies. 
Ensure a system through which all asylum 
seekers are transferred to their final 
Member State as swiftly as possible. 
Register asylum-seekers upon arrival and 
inform them about the procedure swiftly in 
open registration centres at EU borders for 
efficient initial documentation, security and 
medical checks.  
Provide streamlined procedures to 
prevent unnecessary delays and protect 
persons in vulnerable situations, including 
(unaccompanied) minors, pregnant women 
and persons with disabilities, who should 
be identified throughout the asylum 
procedure, particularly upon arrival, and 
receive adequate support. Guardians 
or specially trained assistants must be 
available for unaccompanied minors seeking 
asylum as soon as they are identified.
.
.
.
.
.
3. Humane, fast and fair 
asylum procedures
Use important indicators, such as GDP and 
population density, to determine each 
Member State’s asylum seeker quota. 
Consider meaningful links that the asylum 
seeker might have, such as family and 
community ties, language proficiency and 
qualifications. Consider the voluntary 
solidarity capacity of regions, cities, and 
municipalities in the relocation efforts. 
Ensure that cities and municipalities can 
plan more long-term in terms of their 
housing and integration capacities with the 
distribution key.
Enforce compliance through a robust 
system of penalties for non-compliant 
Member States.
Commit to a Common European Asylum 
System in which responsibilities are shared 
in a spirit of solidarity among Member 
States and supported in all aspects by the 
European Asylum Agency (EUAA). Work 
towards a European Asylum Status that is 
granted by the European Asylum Agency 
across the Union. 
Abolish the principle of first entry and 
ensure asylum seekers are distributed 
according to a mandatory distribution key 
among Member States.
.
.
.
.
4. Fair relocation system


64
65
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
HUMANE MIGRATION	
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
HUMANE MIGRATION
Ensure that the rules for the detention in 
the framework of the asylum or the return 
procedures are harmonised among Member 
States.
Ensure that applicants with special 
reception needs have access to 
full reception conditions, including 
rehabilitation (qualifications for such 
exemptions should require minimal criteria, 
relying on an initial assessment of their 
narratives by a psychologist).
Enforce that the Member States shall not 
hold a person in detention for the sole 
reason that he or she is an applicant.
The grounds for and conditions of 
detention, and the guarantees available to 
detained applicants, shall be in accordance 
with the Reception Conditions Directive. 
Ensure that children are never detained.
Develop and apply alternatives to the 
detention of asylum seekers in all Member 
States.
Ensure that detention of asylum seekers is 
always the last resort after all alternatives 
have been exhausted.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
5. No detainment of 
asylum seekers
Protect against threats and violence arising 
from an applicant’s gender, including 
gender identity and sexual orientation, 
by systematically applying the concept of 
“particular social group” under the Geneva 
Convention.
Allow asylum-seekers to recover from their 
journey before their asylum interviews, 
to prevent them from having inadequate 
preparation or limited opportunities to seek 
legal counsel, reducing the risk of negative 
decisions due to difficulties in presenting 
their case. 
Update the Eurodac database for efficient 
identification with health information. 
Establish a transparent system for 
monitoring the compliance of Member 
States with the EU asylum rules.
Establish a Common European Asylum 
System with a uniform asylum procedure 
that respects the dignity and rights of 
asylum-seekers while fostering social 
integration and cooperation.
Speed up all asylum procedures to a 
maximum of 3 months from entering 
the country to the first decision, while 
guaranteeing social, legal and psychological 
support and decent conditions throughout 
the procedure. Make use of written prima 
facie procedures for positive decisions 
when administrations are overburdened.
Ensure that the EUAA remains at the 
forefront when it comes to a standardised 
asylum process; enable the EUAA to 
cooperate intensively with Member States 
to modernise their asylum systems so 
that they are up to the challenge and 
to intervene independently to ensure 
that even large numbers of arrivals are 
dealt with in an orderly way, in particular 
regarding arrivals by sea.
Harmonise standards for uniform 
procedures and reception conditions, 
including the notion that the decision to 
grant asylum is the same for each Member 
State.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
6. Common European 
Asylum System


66
67
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
HUMANE MIGRATION	
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
HUMANE MIGRATION
Allow asylum seekers to work from day 
one. Ensure that work permits are always 
granted for a sufficient time frame to allow 
for meaningful employment.
Reunite asylum seekers with their families 
as quickly as possible after arrival. Let 
refugees and beneficiaries of subsidiary 
protection be equally entitled to be 
reunited with their families under the 
Family Reunification Directive (2003/86/EC).
Ensure better representation of migrants’ 
voices in the political sphere and active 
engagement with migrant communities on 
local, national and European levels. 
Ensure refugees have at least the same 
rights and pathways to citizenship as other 
third-country nationals in the member 
states.
As all integration is local, set up a local 
integration fund to address the growing 
needs of cities and municipalities and add 
integration as a European competence. 
	
Support community-based decentralised 
social housing and other infrastructure for 
the most vulnerable groups, including locals 
and asylum seekers, and build inclusive local 
centres, offer health services, education, 
cultural exchange, voluntary activities, 
language training, and upskilling and 
reskilling benefitting as well as the local 
population, asylum seekers and migrants in 
need.
.
.
.
.
.
.
7. Integration and 
empowerment of refugees 
and asylum-seekers
Harmonise administrative procedures 
for statelessness recognition ensuring 
access to nationality for stateless persons, 
granting access to essential services, 
supporting unaccompanied stateless minors 
and sharing best practices among EU 
Member States.
Uphold the rights of stateless individuals 
and contribute to their integration and well-
being in the European Union.
.
.
8. Ending statelessness


68
69
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
HUMANE MIGRATION	
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
HUMANE MIGRATION
Enhance EU search and rescue missions, and 
ensure SAR operations and humanitarian 
efforts that mitigate or eliminate the risks 
of irregular pathways (e.g. sea rescue 
or evacuation). Protect the legality of 
humanitarian efforts and ensure official 
collaboration with EU and national 
authorities.
Prioritise transparency through regular 
report publication, and share reports with 
Members of the European Parliament 
and national parliaments. Ensure Frontex 
Fundamental Rights officers are part 
of any operation and all pushbacks by 
national border control are brought to a 
national court. Reinforce the cooperation 
of the EUAA with Frontex to enhance the 
protection of asylum seekers.
.
.
.
9. Fixing Border and Coastal 
Guard Agency
Address the challenges posed by the 
increasing digitisation of trafficking in 
human beings and enhance the criminal 
law response to technology-facilitated 
offences.
Facilitate the tracing, freezing, management 
and confiscation of proceeds of trafficking 
in human beings.
Incorporate feminist and disability 
perspectives, focusing on prevention 
strategies.
Promote international cooperation. 
Integrate a victim-centred approach to the 
complex challenge of human trafficking 
intertwined with crimes like migrant 
smuggling and cybercrime. This means an 
all-encompassing strategy, prioritising the 
assessment of individual needs over law 
enforcement interests, which should extend 
across European, national, and local levels 
to provide assistance and protection for 
trafficking victims.
.
.
.
.
.
10. Combating human 
trafficking
Reinforce the fundamental rights 
monitoring mechanism as part of the 
operational plans, systematically investigate 
human rights violation allegations and 
adopt a zero-tolerance policy towards 
personnel involved in fundamental rights 
violations or obstruct their investigations. 


70
71
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
HUMANE MIGRATION	
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
HUMANE MIGRATION
Improve the regional reception also via the 
Global Refugee Forum. 
 Build international support structures 
for Internally Displaced Persons 
(IDPs) who are displaced within their 
countries.
Offer international assistance to 
host countries and allocate resources 
for secure humanitarian centres 
in crisis-prone areas, providing 
shelter, education and streamlined 
resettlement processes.
In the medium term, ensure that nobody is 
forced to leave the safety of their homes, 
by promoting development cooperation: 
 Continue to combine short-term 
humanitarian aid with long-term 
development strategies.
Bolster economic opportunities in 
vulnerable countries through support 
packages and direct investments, 
reinforcing partnerships with African 
nations under the Strategy with Africa.
De-link cooperation with third 
countries from migration control 
policies.
Promote education programs on 
migration realities, supported by the 
EU through migrant associations in 
these countries.
Ensure that human rights are 
safeguarded in any migration pact with 
third countries with a human rights 
yardstick.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
11. International development 
cooperation
Establish access to legal advice and support, 
along with integrated reintegration 
programs in the country of origin tailored to 
returnees’ needs.
Respect individual circumstances and 
human dignity when promoting successful 
reintegration in countries of origin. 
Put human rights at the core of the Union 
readmission agreements and oppose deals 
with authoritarian regimes. Prioritise 
partnerships with third countries for 
coordinated returns in the framework 
of a respectful and mutually beneficial 
readmission process combined with legal 
migration policies.
Ensure that EU countries uphold 
fundamental rights and procedural 
safeguards during the application of returns 
and support voluntary returns. 
Harmonise the approach across Member 
States regarding safe third-country 
concepts. 
Ensure that Member States strictly respect 
the non-refoulement principle. Oppose the 
repatriation of migrants to countries that 
are not considered safe.
.
.
.
.
.
.
12. Improving returns 


72
73
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
HUMANE MIGRATION	
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
HUMANE MIGRATION
Adapt the current EU framework to 
recognise a legally binding definition of 
climate refugees, ensure that the term 
is adopted under international law, and 
extend humanitarian visas to climate 
refugees.
The right to asylum, enshrined in Art. 18 of 
the EU Charter is a fundamental right that 
Volt wants to safeguard and strengthen in 
subsequent legislation. This includes a revision 
of the New Pact on Migration and Asylum which 
was proposed in September 2020. The Pact is 
accompanied by several legislative proposals 
among others, the Qualification Regulation 
2016/0223 (COD), the Asylum Procedure 
Regulation 2016/0224 (COD), the Reception 
Condition Directive 2016/0222 (COD), as well 
as the Asylum and Migration Management 
Regulation 2020/0279(COD) (AMMR) recently 
agreed upon by the Council. 
Volt aims at providing the Union with 
competencies to legislate on harmonized 
integration policies on the occasion of a 
forthcoming Treaty change. Based on the 
Moonshot policies falling under this act further 
updates are suggested to EU legislation. In 
addition, the so-called solidarity mechanism 
as set out by the AMMR, which is currently 
facilitating the mandatory relocation needs 
to be altered to ensure a fair and efficient 
relocation by accounting for personal links of 
refugees and Member States’ key indicators 
such as, for example, GDP. Furthermore, Volt 
.
13. Legal protection for 
climate refugees 
How we will pursue this act in 
the European Parliament
requires the proposed Asylum Procedure 
Regulation 2016/0224 (COD) to further 
harmonize asylum procedures and to account 
for humane and streamlined procedures at the 
borders. The proposed Qualification Regulation 
2016/0223 (COD) and Reception Condition 
Directive 2016/0222 (COD) must harmonize 
standards across Member States including 
a uniform approach to granting asylum and 
sufficient reception conditions. In addition, the 
Pact shall highlight that detention of asylum 
seekers can only be a measure of last resort 
and ensure that minors may not be detained. 
Moreover, Volt wants to support the revision of 
the Anti-Trafficking Directive 2011/36/EU and 
call on all Member States to improve the early 
identification and referral of victims to support 
services, in particular in the context of the 
asylum procedure. Refugees and beneficiaries 
of subsidiary protection shall be equally 
entitled to be reunited with their families under 
the Family Reunification Directive 2003/86/EC. 
To recognise the status of climate refugees, 
Volt will advocate for international and EU 
treaties as well as secondary legislation such 
as the Qualification Directive to recognise the 
status. 


74
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
HUMANE MIGRATION	
75
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
HUMANE MIGRATION
75
Volt Europe
Europe’s demographic challenge, characterised by an ageing population and skill shortages, 
presents an opportunity for innovation and adaptability that could enhance its long-term 
competitiveness and economic resilience. Therefore, there is a need to attract and retain 
international talent while ensuring equal rights for non-EU workers. This is essential to prevent 
labour exploitation and create an attractive environment for third-country nationals across all 
wage levels.
Low- and medium-wage sector workers often face precarious conditions and risk labour 
exploitation due to their non-EU status, as their employment is tied to specific employers. In 
contrast, high-wage labour migration faces bureaucratic hurdles that limit their mobility within 
the EU and lead many skilled workers to emigrate to more favourable destinations like Canada, 
the US and Australia.
The fragmentation of labour markets across Member States presents challenges to 
competitiveness. A common European migration code would enhance vitality and growth by 
effectively managing migration, filling skill gaps, fostering innovation and sustaining critical 
industries. Facilitating the mobility of third-country nationals would enable them to address 
labour market challenges not only in one country but across the entire EU, benefiting both 
economies and societies.
Volt aims to create an efficient system that respects migrant workers’ rights, enhances their 
appeal to the EU labour market, boosts competitiveness, and fosters European Union prosperity 
and social cohesion.
To this end, we advocate for a uniform EU rights-based framework, including decoupling residence 
permits from employers, ensuring family reunification rights and providing access to social 
benefits. These changes empower migrants, creating a fair and equal labour market.
We also prioritise establishing safe and regular pathways for migrant workers to address labour 
shortages and skills gaps, making the EU labour market more dynamic and responsive.
Recognizing the benefits of intra and inter-EU mobility, we streamline processes for efficient 
labour markets and better migrant integration, promoting social cohesion. This approach 
enhances the EU’s overall attractiveness, making it more competitive for skilled workers while 
benefiting all member states’ development and prosperity.
6. Labour Migration 
Act
The total costs of this Act, which consist of 
the implementation costs and the annual 
costs for five years, is € 66.314.000.000.  The 
implementation costs are € 3.539.000.000 and 
the annual costs are € 12.555.000.000.
Examples of implementation costs in the 
Moonshot Program are the policy and legal 
framework development, the capacity building 
and training of (new) staff, the building of IT 
or physical infrastructure, or public awareness 
campaigns.
Examples of annual costs are salaries and 
benefits, administrative costs, infrastructure 
maintenance, or the costs associated with the 
running of the proposed policies.
The total costs of the complete Moonshot 
Program are mentioned separately from the 
total income.
Costs and Income of the 
proposals included in the Act
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
HUMANE MIGRATION	
74
Volt Europe


76
77
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
HUMANE MIGRATION	
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
HUMANE MIGRATION
Protect migrant workers from labour 
exploitation by delinking residence permits 
from single employers and their particular 
jobs and increasing the length of stay 
to protect especially those in seasonal 
and temporary work arrangements 
since the loss of employment would not 
automatically lead to a loss of residence 
status.
	
Adopt the Commission guidelines to 
incentivize victims of labour exploitation 
to report their experiences to a monitoring 
authority without facing the risk of 
expulsion.
Put a special emphasis on establishing 
a ‘firewall’ between labour justice and 
immigration enforcement, which would 
allow migrant workers to safely file a 
complaint against abusive employers 
without fear of losing their residence 
status, or in the case of undocumented 
migrants, being detained and deported. 
The European Labour Authority can play an 
important role in coordinating this.
Enforce strict and heavy EU penalties on 
member states where there are recurring 
situations of exploitative work for migrant 
workers.
Grant visa holders the freedom to move 
across the EU to unify the European 
labour market for third-country nationals. 
Harmonise intra-EU mobility right across 
various directives.
Allow migrant applications for a residence 
permit from within the EU for all migrants, 
irrespective of their status or lack of 
residence status. 
Grant and strengthen family reunification 
rights for all migrant workers by improving 
the implementation of the family 
reunification directive.
Strengthen access to social rights, including 
the right to healthcare, social security, 
housing, justice and realisation of gender 
equality.
Add English as an official language. Migrant 
workers, whether outside the EU or intra-
EU migrant workers, should have access 
to language services when dealing with 
governmental bureaucracy so that local 
language does not become a barrier. This 
could be optimised through centralised, 
digital platforms. For example, this will 
improve access to Social Security or 
unemployment rights.
Establish a European Migration Code with 
new legal pathways for all wage and skill 
levels to address labour shortages in an 
ageing society.
Attract international talent with a “Make it 
in Europe” programme to match vacancies 
of European employers with international 
talent for all wage and skill levels and from 
all countries of origin.
Create an EU Talent pooling and matching 
platform for labour migrants that addresses 
skills shortages and mismatches within 
the EU labour market and that facilitates 
recognition of foreign qualifications and 
skills on the EU level. 
Ensure that recognition of non-EU 
qualifications and skills is eased for the 
benefit of mutual recognition on the EU 
level, which will open up new opportunities 
for students, researchers and other 
professionals.
Speed up visa processes to last a maximum 
of 3 months.
Create regular and safe pathways to 
address the current unmet demand in low 
and medium-wage sectors. This includes 
new channels such as job-seeker and 
vocational-training visas, job-seeking visas, 
and youth mobility schemes, accessible to 
all migrant workers.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
1. Low and medium-wage 
labour migration
.
.
.


78
79
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
HUMANE MIGRATION	
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
HUMANE MIGRATION
Naturalisation: free, simple and quick 
naturalisation process for labour 
migrants who have spent 3 years in the 
EU contributing to the EU economy 
(maximum of 2 months processing).
Launch an EU Talent Pool to match highly 
skilled workers with employers across the 
EU, based on an online platform that allows 
workers to register their profile, skills, 
qualifications, and preferences and allows 
employers to access the pool and offer jobs 
to suitable candidates.
Launch an EU Skills Recognition Framework 
to facilitate the unbureaucratic recognition 
of foreign qualifications and competencies 
across the EU, providing common standards, 
guidelines, and tools for assessing and 
validating skills acquired outside the EU.
Launch an EU Integration Strategy to 
support the social inclusion of highly 
skilled workers and their families through 
language courses, cultural orientation 
programmes, mentoring schemes, and civic 
initiatives, and encourage greater dialogue 
and cooperation between migrants and 
host communities.
Embrace an open and dynamic approach 
to immigration, especially for high-skilled 
workers from outside the EU, to fight 
the unprecedented challenges of the 
21st Century, from geopolitical tensions 
and competition to the climate crisis and 
growing inequalities. 
Develop a new framework to attract talent 
that contributes to innovation, growth 
and competitiveness and ensure fair and 
transparent conditions for all workers, 
regardless of their origins. 
Foster social cohesion and integration 
by promoting cultural diversity, mutual 
respect, and civic participation.
Launch an EU Blue Card scheme to simplify 
and harmonise the admission criteria and 
procedures for highly skilled workers:
Application: unbureaucratic, fast-track, 
simplified, online process at single EU-
wide application points (maximum of 
14 days processing).
Renewal: simplified online renewal 
process with a longer validity period.
Mobility: flexible single EU-wide 
mobility scheme for highly skilled 
migrants who wish to move to a job in 
another EU country, to retain highly 
skilled workers in the EU.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2. High-wage labour 
migration
Ensure that the EU offers crucial services, 
protection and support to those lacking 
legal status to reduce exploitation and 
foster social cohesion by facilitating fair 
treatment and integration opportunities. 
Implement an orderly and condition-based 
administrative system that enables status 
change from irregular to regular economic 
migrants, without undermining the asylum 
decision.
.
.
3. Undocumented 
migration 


80
81
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
HUMANE MIGRATION	
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
HUMANE MIGRATION
The total costs of this Act, which consist of 
the implementation costs and the annual 
costs for five years, is € 4.753.000.000.  The 
implementation costs are € 645.500.000 and 
the annual costs are € 821.500.000.
Examples of implementation costs in the 
Moonshot Program are the policy and legal 
framework development, the capacity building 
and training of (new) staff, the building of IT 
or physical infrastructure, or public awareness 
campaigns.
Examples of annual costs are salaries and 
benefits, administrative costs, infrastructure 
maintenance, or the costs associated with the 
running of the proposed policies.
The total costs of the complete Moonshot 
Program are mentioned separately from the 
total income.
Costs and Income of the 
proposals included in the Act
According to Article 79 of the TFEU, the EU may 
adopt measures relating to conditions of entry 
and residence, as well as the definition of rights 
of third-country nationals legally residing in 
the EU. Moreover, Article 21 of the Charter of 
Fundamental Rights of the European Union lays 
down the right to non-discrimination.
Volt requires the New Pact on Migration and 
Asylum to further implement the notion of 
reinforcing safe and legal migration, equal 
rights for non-EU workers and approaches 
to regularize undocumented migrants. To 
strengthen existing legislation in the field of 
integration of third-country nationals and, 
the rights of migrants and their families as 
well as to facilitate legal pathways to the EU, 
Volt wants to establish a European Migration 
Code. This will include, inter alia, a talent pool 
to match and facilitate labour needs among 
How we will pursue this act in 
the European Parliament
EU Member States for all wage and skill levels 
to address labour shortages in an ageing 
society. Volt wants to grant and strengthen 
family reunification rights for all migrant 
workers by improving the implementation of 
the Family Reunification Directive 2003/86/EC. 
Moreover, a modernized Single Permit Directive 
2022/0131(COD) shall strengthen the right 
to work and stay in the EU as well as the right 
to equal treatment, particularly for low- and 
medium-waged workers. Volt supports the 
revision of the Long-term Residents Directive 
2003/109/EC, to allow third-country nationals 
to ask for citizenship after 3 years of legal stay 
in the Union in all Member States. Furthermore, 
Volt wants to expand the new rights under 
the revised BlueCard Directive by exempting 
more professions from the university degree 
requirement.


83
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
MAKING VOTES COUNT
82
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
MAKING VOTES COUNT	
82
Build the path towards a European 
Federal Declaration and the legitimate 
basis for a Constitutional Convention 
to draft a European Constitution, 
which establishes a Federal Europe 
based on democratic legitimacy and 
accountability.
Volt Europe
A fully integrated European Union remains a work in progress. An “ever closer Union among the 
peoples of Europe” cannot be achieved if we do not take ambitious steps towards a Federal EU.
This Union is today as essential as it was when it was created in the aftermath of the Second 
World War and is increasingly becoming a geopolitical necessity. Issues such as climate change, 
migration, global economic competition and the disregard for the rules-based international order 
cannot be tackled by small, individual actors, and demand unified action. Even within the EU, the 
current structure allows any single Member State to block crucial legislation, sanctions packages 
or trade deals that may be of fundamental importance to millions of European citizens. To deliver 
tangible benefits and better serve its citizens, the EU needs to reform. 
The “Reform the EU Act” seeks to fortify the EU’s capacity for collective action, ensuring that 
Member States collaborate effectively to address shared challenges. Central to this is the 
bolstering of the EU’s democratic legitimacy. The current institutional framework prioritises the 
interests of Member States over those of citizens, creating decision-making processes that are 
inefficient and heavily influenced by national interest, limiting the EU’s ability to act fast and 
with ambition in the interest of the people. 
With EU enlargement on the horizon, the old ways of decision-making also require reform to 
reflect the myriad of interconnected challenges we face. Additional voices in the Council after 
enlargement will intensify debate and risk regular gridlock. At the same time, the European 
Parliament, the only directly elected EU institution, remains unable to propose legislation and 
must wait for other institutions to act. 
Establishing a European Constitution and an elected EU government will increase transparency 
and place citizens and democratic legitimacy at the heart of European democracy. Bridging 
the gap between citizens and the institutions will reinforce trust in the Union, creating a true 
European representative democracy and counteracting harmful disillusionment in the political 
system, and provide the EU with the capacity to effectively respond to challenges both at 
home and abroad. Forming a true fiscal and monetary union will enable a cohesive, unified and 
transparent system that enhances the EU’s capacity to address economic shocks effectively. 
7. Reform the EU Act 
Initiate a European Convention to reform 
the European Treaties in the new legislative 
term:
Engage through citizen debates 
to define and shape the values, 
competencies, finances, and 
institutional setup of a Federal Europe, 
building on the European Parliament’s 
proposal to reform the EU.
.
.
.
1.	 Federal Europe 
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
MAKING VOTES COUNT
83
Volt Europe


84
85
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
MAKING VOTES COUNT	
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
MAKING VOTES COUNT
Allow the Prime Minister to propose 
Ministers to be confirmed by the 
European Parliament. Each Minister 
will head a Ministry which will replace 
the current Directorates-General 
system in the European Commission.
Allow for the removal from office 
of any Minister or of the European 
Government as a whole by a vote 
of no confidence by the European 
Parliament at any time, thus making it 
accountable to European citizens.
Make this executive branch 
accountable to voters, depending on 
the European Parliament’s confidence 
and the European Senate.
Reform the European Commission into a 
European Government:
Elect an EU Prime Minister from the 
Members of the European Parliament, 
in place of the President of the 
European Commission. 
Grant the Prime Minister leadership 
over a Cabinet of Ministers, whose 
size is not determined by the number 
of Member States, but by the needs 
of the EU government and its citizens. 
There should be a maximum of one 
minister from each member state.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2.	A European Government 
The EU government is consulted and can 
propose amendments, though the voting 
power lies with the co-legislators: the 
European Parliament and the European 
Senate.
The role of the European Parliament must 
change from merely co-deciding laws to 
initiating new legislation - a power that 
would be shared with the Senate, the EU 
Citizens via the European Citizens’ Initiative 
(ECI) and the European Government.
New laws can be proposed by a political 
group or an equivalent minimum number of 
individual MEPs that would be required to 
form a political group.
.
.
.
3.	Legislative initiative for 
the European Parliament


86
87
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
MAKING VOTES COUNT	
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
MAKING VOTES COUNT
Establish a European Senate:
Transform the Council of the European 
Union into the European Senate, 
serving as the EU’s second chamber. 
Abolish the European Council.
Design the European Senate to 
represent Member States with 
an equal number of senators per 
Member State designated by national 
parliaments. This chamber would 
have an equal number of senators per 
member state, ensuring that all states 
have an equal say in the legislative 
process.
In the meantime, ensure the ability to 
make decisions through Qualified Majority 
Voting (QMV) instead of unanimity. This is 
particularly relevant for those topics that 
currently fall under the Common Foreign 
and Security Policy (CFSP), for example, 
sanctions, but also for enlargement or 
taxation. For certain decisions, such as 
treaty change, military deployments or EU 
enlargement, a form of reinforced qualified 
majority voting will apply.
.
.
.
.
4.	A European Senate
Make ECHR rulings universal to bring 
uniformity to human rights standards across 
the bloc, incentivising proactive compliance 
and streamlining enforcement processes. 
Transform the Court of Justice of 
the European Union (CJEU) into a 
Constitutional Court to consolidate the 
legal and democratic foundations of the 
European Union, contributing towards 
a uniform interpretation of EU laws and 
affirming the primacy of EU legislation. 
Deepen democratic engagement by 
empowering citizens and member states 
with a structured platform to challenge and 
scrutinise EU decisions on constitutional 
grounds and the basis of fundamental 
rights.
.
.
5.	Constitutional Court and 
European Court of Human 
Rights (ECHR)


88
89
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
MAKING VOTES COUNT	
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
MAKING VOTES COUNT
Create budgetary instruments that 
automatically increase spending in 
downturns and allow more budgetary 
flexibility if a recession looms to weather 
cyclical macroeconomic downturns. 
Encourage the remaining Member States 
to adopt the Euro, fostering economic 
cohesion and stability.
Create a dual mandate for the European 
Central Bank (ECB), ensuring both price 
stability and employment, committing to 
a Europe that thrives on both financial 
prudence and inclusive growth. 
Establish an EU Ministry of Finance to act 
as a regulator, setting and harmonising 
standards for national tax administrations.
Reform the fiscal architecture of the 
European Union by tripling the EU budget 
to provide investments, address social 
imbalances, and shield against economic 
downturns. 
Allow a democratic Europe to levy its taxes, 
especially on unsustainable consumption 
and severe wealth inequality, to fund its 
budget, supported by clear and binding 
budget rules for Member States and greater 
flexibility than in the current Maastricht 
criteria. 
Promote debt issuance by the EU aimed 
at fostering investments into economic 
development projects in line with common 
European needs. The creation of such 
European debt will safeguard financial 
stability in an integrated financial market. 
At the same time, the new fiscal and 
monetary union should provide more 
effective institutionalised tools to 
guarantee that Member States maintain a 
balanced budget in structural terms.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
6.	Fiscal and monetary 
union 
Issue guidance and binding decisions 
on the application of the horizontal 
legal framework and on any legislative 
(vertical) proposal that stems from it.
Oversee the application and 
cross-border enforcement of the 
regulation, adopt opinions to ensure 
the consistency of application of the 
regulation by the national supervisory 
authorities and act as a dispute 
resolution body.
Establish independent authorities at 
the European Level that support the 
interpretation of core concepts and the 
harmonious application of the EU normative 
corpus, which grows consistently, across 
various EU jurisdictions:
Work in collaboration with 
representatives from Member States, 
researchers and civil society. They 
will not take their instructions from 
anybody.
.
.
.
.
7.  Regulatory enforcement


90
91
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
MAKING VOTES COUNT	
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
MAKING VOTES COUNT
90
Volt Europe
How we will pursue this act in 
the European Parliament
Costs and Income of the 
proposals included in the Act
To fortify the EU’s capacity for collective action, 
Volt aims to establish a European Convention 
on a Federal Europe. This Convention would 
transform the two EU Treaties into a European 
Constitution and modernize the legislative 
framework by reforming the role of the 
European Union institutions. The Council of 
the European Union should be transformed 
into the European Senate, serving as the EU’s 
second chamber which requires a Treaty change 
regarding the procedure of the creation of 
the Council in Article 15 TEU.  Moreover, the 
European Parliament’s legislative powers 
shall be extended by granting it legislative 
competence, requiring a change of Article 
17 TEU, which as of now only allows the 
Commission such initiative unless stated 
otherwise in the Treaties.
The total costs of this Act, which consist of 
the implementation costs and the annual 
costs for five years, is € 4.306.500.000.  The 
implementation costs are € 876.500.000 and 
the annual costs are € 686.000.000.
Examples of implementation costs in the 
Moonshot Program are the policy and legal 
framework development, the capacity building 
and training of (new) staff, the building of IT 
or physical infrastructure, or public awareness 
campaigns.
Examples of annual costs are salaries and 
benefits, administrative costs, infrastructure 
maintenance, or the costs associated with the 
running of the proposed policies.
The total costs of the complete Moonshot 
Program are mentioned separately from the 
total income.
Volt strives to make the EU’s decision-making 
process more effective by strengthening 
qualified majority voting as opposed to 
unanimity decision-making for Council decisions 
under Article 7 TEU. Additionally, by removing 
the veto ability of  Member States in Council 
decisions Volt wants to reinforce the Union’s 
founding values and principles in Article 2 TEU 
such as human dignity, freedom, democracy, 
equality, the rule of law and respect for human 
rights. Regarding the judicial system of the 
Union, Volt advocates for the enforcement 
of Article 6 TEU for the judgments of the 
European Convention of Human Rights to 
become binding on the EU and in turn on the 
Member States. This is essential for the equal 
protection of human rights standards across 
the Union. Furthermore, for a true unified 
fiscal system to be achieved, European taxes 
must be levied. The competence to raise direct 
taxes requires new primary and secondary EU 
legislation to expand and add to the existing 
harmonized standards on taxation on a 
supranational level. To realize the potential of 
indirect taxes, such as digital or carbon taxes, 
a new protocol may be established based on 
the consent of Member States. Implementing 
binding budget rules that keep national debt 
in check requires, among others, a reform of 
Article 121 TFEU.


92
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAM POLICY PROPOSALS
MAKING VOTES COUNT	
Creating a more democratic union is a path to a fairer and more just EU and a necessity for 
tackling modern challenges. A system prioritising the national interest over that of 500 million 
citizens creates fundamental problems and a deepening divide between citizens and the 
institutions that govern them. This resulting misalignment gives rise to a democratic deficit 
that erodes public trust in the European project. 
Political discontent is further exacerbated by the lack of transparency that shrouds EU 
decision-making. The European Council has become one of the most powerful political bodies 
and yet is the most untransparent, making backroom deals without scrutiny that seal the fate 
of millions of European citizens. This opacity has contributed to a growing disillusionment 
among citizens who feel disconnected from the processes that shape their lives.
The European Democracy Act will seek to create a clear link between European citizens and the 
EU decision-making processes, rectifying systemic deficiencies and bridging the gap between 
citizens and their institutions. Citizens will understand and be able to influence the decisions 
that shape their lives. Transparency in EU processes will enhance accountability by establishing 
unequivocal lines of responsibility within the EU apparatus and promote citizens’ participation 
in the decision-making process.
Crucially, this Act envisions a Europe where individual citizens’ interests and voices take 
centre stage, transcending the constraints of national politics. By reimagining electoral 
and parliamentary systems, it seeks to create a European democracy that is genuinely 
representative, accountable, and responsive to the needs of all its citizens.
This requires a robust European media landscape that fosters transparency and an informed 
citizenry. This act therefore promotes media independence, diversity and integrity, and takes 
measures to fight rampant disinformation in the digital age.
8. European 
Democracy Act 
93
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAM POLICY PROPOSALS 
MAKING VOTES COUNT
Reform the regulation on EuPPs, making 
individual membership of citizens standard, 
in contrast to the current model where 
EuPPs are alliances of national parties. 
Allow for a stronger and more cohesive link 
between EuPPs and their national, regional 
and local branches, operating across the EU 
under one name.
Reform the current structure of European 
political parties (EuPP), which consists 
of national parties with often conflicting 
interests and priorities, focused on 
representing national or regional interests, 
rather than the interests of European 
citizens.
Create full-fledged, pan-European political 
parties that promote the general interest of 
all European citizens. 
.
.
.
.
1.	 European political parties


94
95
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
MAKING VOTES COUNT	
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
MAKING VOTES COUNT
Make party lists of gender alternated in 
their ranking to promote gender equality in 
political representation. Establish additional 
representation goals for other minorities 
to ensure a plural and representative 
parliamentary composition.
Put in place voter education initiatives to 
ensure voters are well informed about 
the electoral process, their rights and 
responsibilities. Establish systems to help 
everyone, including people with disabilities, 
participate in the democratic process.
Make voting and being elected as 
accessible as possible and make EU 
elections Europeanised, making MEPs truly 
accountable to citizens. 
Reform and harmonise the EU’s voting 
system by setting the legal voting age to 
16 and the minimum age for running for 
candidacy to 18, proposing an EU-wide 
single election date, and establishing 
common campaign rules and voting 
mechanisms. 
Make gradual steps towards making the 
EU a single electoral district where voters 
choose representatives from transnational 
lists. Allow voters to cast two votes, with 
one vote electing an MEP from a single 
national district and the other from a 
Europe-wide list. Make the number of MEPs 
elected from each list as close as possible 
to the proportion of votes received. This 
excludes the use of any artificial threshold.
.
.
.
.
.
2.	Harmonized voting systems 
for European elections
Grant conditional full voting rights 
following 24 months of continuous 
residence, introduced based on reciprocity 
in an opt-in process for Member States 
ready to advance from voting according 
to citizenship towards voting according to 
residency. 
Ensure that the votes of the 15 million 
citizens that today live in another EU 
Member State than that of their country 
of origin are not lost. Not having voting 
rights in both the country of residence and 
the country of origin would mean that the 
more integrated Europe becomes, the more 
elections are tainted towards nationalism.
Give full voting rights (universal suffrage) to 
EU mobile citizens. Following the principle 
of “No taxation without representation”, 
grant a 5th freedom to the European single 
market: the right to choose to vote in all 
elections in the country of residence.
Expand the voting rights granted by the 
Maastricht treaty in municipal and European 
elections to mobile EU citizens, in place 
since 1992, to regional, national and 
presidential elections.
.
.
.
.
3.	Voting rights in country 
of residence


96
97
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
MAKING VOTES COUNT	
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
MAKING VOTES COUNT
Reform of the European Citizens’ 
Initiative (ECIs), empowering citizens to 
initiate policy, by lowering the number of 
signatures required from one million to 
500,000 and improving the online signature 
collection. All ECIs that pass this threshold 
must be deliberated in Parliament.
Make sustainability protected as a core 
European value, to be added to the existing 
protection of democracy, justice, rule 
of law, human dignity, human rights and 
equality.
Establish a permanent European Citizens’ 
Assembly, made up of a rotating group of 
randomly selected citizens, with rotating 
membership. The Assembly would spark 
transnational dialogues on a broad 
spectrum of issues, setting agendas, and 
providing feedback on legislative proposals. 
The resultant recommendations must be 
considered in relevant policy discussions. 
Establish the Conference on the Future of 
Europe as a recurring event, strengthening 
its role in shaping our future and that of 
future generations.
.
.
.
.
4.	Citizen participation in 
policy-making
Treat and address whole-of-society threats, 
such as hybrid threats (e.g., disinformation), 
under a unified strategic deterrent 
framework (Act 2, Proposal 7).
Accelerate infringement procedures 
tailored for situations with an immediate 
threat to democratic values, human rights, 
or the rule of law, ensuring the EU can 
put an end to EU law violations promptly 
through robust mechanisms to protect our 
foundational values. 
Put in place early warning systems that 
trigger preemptive steps to address the 
situation before further escalations.
.
.
.
5.	Preventing democratic 
backsliding


98
99
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
MAKING VOTES COUNT	
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
MAKING VOTES COUNT
Create a more ambitious EU Ethics Body 
that serves as a dedicated watchdog to 
investigate and adjudicate cases of ethical 
misconduct, conflicts of interest, and 
breaches of integrity within EU institutions.
Strengthen existing anti-corruption 
instruments and mechanisms, such as the 
European Union Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) 
and the European Public Prosecutor’s Office 
(EPPO). Corruption is a seed that yields 
mistrust that needs to be uprooted. 
Enhance transparency by providing 
detailed and comprehensible reports on 
the allocation and use of funds assigned 
to EU elected officials and supporting the 
disclosure of incomes and assets for all 
elected EU officials. 
.
.
.
6.	Fighting corruption
Create transparency by ensuring EU 
Parliamentarians and officials publish their 
assets and by obliging lobbyists to register 
meetings with EU officials in a centralised, 
publicly available platform
Increase the “cooling off” time between 
working for EU institutions and the private 
sector from 6 months to 12 months, to close 
the “revolving door” that allows unchecked 
and direct access by corporate lobbyists to 
influence EU policy.  
Make the EU Transparency Register 
mandatory and introduce a legally binding 
code of conduct, building on the current 
response to Qatargate.
.
.
.
7.	 Lobbying regulations


100
101
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
MAKING VOTES COUNT	
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
MAKING VOTES COUNT
Establish rapid response mechanisms at the 
EU level to provide immediate assistance 
to journalists facing threats or violence, 
including legal aid, temporary relocations, 
and security services.
Strengthen and expand protections for 
whistleblowers, who often collaborate with 
journalists to expose wrongdoing.
Enact robust anti-SLAPP (Strategic Lawsuit 
Against Public Participation) laws to deter 
powerful individuals or entities from filing 
baseless lawsuits against journalists with 
the sole intent of silencing or bankrupting 
them, thus protecting journalists and their 
role in holding power accountable. 
.
.
.
8.	Safety and protection 
of journalists 
Establish a European Netflix as a European 
broadcaster, combining access to all media 
produced with public money across the 
union. Establish a TV programme under 
the auspices of the broadcaster. Abolish 
geoblocking.
Support the creation of a strong network 
of European public broadcasters, building 
on experiences from corporations like EBU, 
ARTE and 3sat, functioning as forums for 
all European public broadcasters to share 
information and best practices, while 
also facilitating the exchange of national 
content. This will ensure that information is 
not limited to specific areas.
Offer financial support to encourage 
European Broadcast agencies to provide 
translated content from national services 
across multiple channels, including radio, 
television, and the Internet. This also allows 
for better reporting on important issues 
and discussions on the European level. 
.
.
.
9.	 European Broadcasting
agencies


102
103
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
MAKING VOTES COUNT	
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
MAKING VOTES COUNT
Integrate and extend existing open 
data dashboards and public information 
platforms to take on the citizen’s 
perspective by providing accessible tools 
optimised for their user experience.
Harmonise legislation so that commercial 
registries of Member States will publish 
annual reports on private enterprises free 
of charge.
Ensure wider access to public data that 
encompasses statistics, research, geospatial 
data and all other kinds of public data, 
as well as governmental decision-making 
information on all levels of government 
within the EU, such as voting records, 
debates, financial information and decision 
memos, unless an exemption for security or 
confidentiality is necessary.
.
.
.
10. Transparency, 
accountability and informed 
decision-making
Treat open-source solutions as a 
deciding factor, on par with accessibility, 
functionality, and usability, when 
considering software products for public 
services and operations. In cases where 
new software components are developed 
using public funds, the software must be 
published under a FLOSS licence.
Place the burden of liability of open-
source software components onto those 
commercially deploying (e.g. integrators) 
the software and require the stakeholders 
who benefit the most from this deployment 
to ensure CE compliance of the software 
(excluding end consumers).
Release software components funded by 
public resources under a free/libre and 
open-source software (FLOSS) licence to 
ensure transparency and to enable the 
use and adaptation of the software and its 
source code by the broad public for both 
private and commercial use.
	
Pave the way for initiatives analogous 
to the Open Technology Fund, the Open 
Collective or the Sovereign Tech Fund, that 
help generate funding for open digital 
technologies, such as widely used open-
source software that serves as a critical 
component in software products and 
services many Europeans use.
Cultivate a financially sustainable 
ecosystem that reduces our dependency 
on precarious volunteer efforts for key 
software libraries and infrastructure, 
utilised by both the public and private 
sectors.
.
.
.
.
.
11. Open-source software


104
105
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
MAKING VOTES COUNT	
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
MAKING VOTES COUNT
Strengthen Euroregions across the EU:
Recognise that cross-border 
collaborations show a great variety 
in how they work and are pivotal in 
shaping a truly federal Europe. Around 
30% of the people living in the EU live 
in one of the 152 active Euroregions.
Place focused attention to bring 
Euroregions closer to the national and 
regional governments. The current 
organisation of the Euroregions shows 
a differentiation in the goals they seek 
to achieve and the themes they work 
on, their legal status and their funding.
Develop policies that make the 
organisation of funding of these 
regions more transparent. Allow 
citizens to actively participate in 
the decision-making process for 
Euroregions. Promote a coherent 
policy approach across the EU.
The European Democracy Act comprises 
11 Moonshot policies, which strengthen 
democratic rules for the European political 
parties including lobbying regulations, 
increasing citizens’ participation in the 
policymaking processes, fighting corruption 
and hindering a  democratic backslide of  
Member States, strengthening the protection 
of journalists and fighting disinformation as 
well as illegal data sharing.
The proposed policies require adapting primary 
EU legislation. Based on amending Art. 11 
TEU, Volt wants to encourage and facilitate 
citizens’ participation through a reform of the 
European Citizens’ Initiative (ECI) to allow for 
easier citizen participation. Moreover, Article 
7 TEU procedure, which allows the Council to 
suspend certain rights, including voting rights, 
of a Member State when in breach of EU values, 
forms a vital part of the European Democracy 
Act. This is why, for serious and persistent 
breaches, an accelerated infringement 
procedure against the Member State in 
breach is necessary based on an expansion 
of the stated provision. The existing Rules of 
Procedure of the European Parliament (Chapter 
4, Title I) need to be amended to establish 
.
.
.
.
12. Strengthening Euroregions
How we will pursue this act in 
the European Parliament 
clear campaign financing rules, individual 
membership and joint financing. Additionally, 
a legally binding Code of Conduct should be 
introduced for EU policymakers to increase 
transparency of the actions taken by EU 
policymakers and the reasoning behind them. 
A refinement of the existing rules regulating 
lobbying in the Rule of Procedure of the 
European Parliament (2019), such as Rules 11 
and 35, is also necessary. To tackle corruption 
effectively, the European Union Anti-Fraud 
Office (OLAF) Regulation No 883/2013 must 
be amended to vest more investigative and 
enforcement powers to the institution. 
Moreover, the Commission’s proposal for an 
EU Ethics Body must be realized by amending 
Article 13 TEU to include this institution. 
Furthermore, a more democratic and 
transparent Union also requires the protection 
of journalists, which may be realized through 
the enactment of the proposed Directive aimed 
at addressing abusive lawsuits called ‘SLAPPs’. 
Additionally, the Whistleblower Directive (EU) 
2019/1937 must be amended to provide more 
protection for whistleblowers who collaborate 
with journalists to expose wrongdoing.


106
107
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
MAKING VOTES COUNT	
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
MAKING VOTES COUNT
European Broadcasting Agency
To serve the goals in both Article 165 
(education) and 167 (culture) of the TFEU, 
and within the Creative Europe Programme, 
the EU must adopt incentive measures 
to facilitate exchanges of information 
between national news agencies and 
outlets, by, among other things, translating 
national content and establishing a 
European Broadcasting Platform. 
	
The platform will give special attention 
to improving knowledge of European 
culture, history, and diversity, and serve as 
a platform for artistic and literary creation 
and exchange.
The European Democracy Act comprises 
11 Moonshot policies, which strengthen 
democratic rules for the European political 
parties including lobbying regulations, 
increasing citizens’ participation in the 
policymaking processes, fighting corruption 
and hindering a  democratic backslide of  
Member States, strengthening the protection 
of journalists and fighting disinformation as 
well as illegal data sharing.
The proposed policies require adapting primary 
EU legislation. Based on amending Art. 11 
TEU, Volt wants to encourage and facilitate 
citizens’ participation through a reform of the 
European Citizens’ Initiative (ECI) to allow for 
easier citizen participation. Moreover, Article 
7 TEU procedure, which allows the Council to 
suspend certain rights, including voting rights, 
of a Member State when in breach of EU values, 
forms a vital part of the European Democracy 
Act. This is why, for serious and persistent 
breaches, an accelerated infringement 
procedure against the Member State in 
breach is necessary based on an expansion 
of the stated provision. The existing Rules of 
Procedure of the European Parliament (Chapter 
4, Title I) need to be amended to establish 
clear campaign financing rules, individual 
membership and joint financing. Additionally, 
a legally binding Code of Conduct should be 
introduced for EU policymakers to increase 
transparency of the actions taken by EU 
policymakers and the reasoning behind them. 
A refinement of the existing rules regulating 
How we will pursue this act in 
the European Parliament 
lobbying in the Rule of Procedure of the 
European Parliament (2019), such as Rules 11 
and 35, is also necessary. To tackle corruption 
effectively, the European Union Anti-Fraud 
Office (OLAF) Regulation No 883/2013 must 
be amended to vest more investigative and 
enforcement powers to the institution. 
Moreover, the Commission’s proposal for an 
EU Ethics Body must be realized by amending 
Article 13 TEU to include this institution. 
Furthermore, a more democratic and 
transparent Union also requires the protection 
of journalists, which may be realized through 
the enactment of the proposed Directive aimed 
at addressing abusive lawsuits called ‘SLAPPs’. 
Additionally, the Whistleblower Directive (EU) 
2019/1937 must be amended to provide more 
protection for whistleblowers who collaborate 
with journalists to expose wrongdoing.
EU Ethics Body
Whilst the European Commission has 
presented a proposal for the creation of an 
interinstitutional Ethics Body, this proposal 
lacks ambition. Rather than having its 
members be predominantly representatives 
of different EU institutions, the Ethics body 
should be presided over by independent 
ethical experts. 
In addition to providing guidance 
recommendations, the ethics body should 
receive investigating and sanctioning 
powers in all areas to which it has purview.
To simplify ethical regulations, the ethics 
body should replace other existing bodies 
for the EU, creating a clear authority for 
ethical matters.
Corruption
To address issues of financial impropriety, 
empower OLAF with enhanced investigative 
authority in these matters. 
Lobbying regulations
Refine the existing lobbying regulations 
outlined in the Rules of Procedure of the 
European Parliament and enhance the 
criteria in the Transparency Register.
Introduce measures that deter unchecked 
access, make registration mandates 
more stringent, and establish firm legal 
frameworks to ensure ethical conduct.
Protection of journalists
Review the proposed SLAPPs Directive 
aimed at addressing abusive lawsuits 
that target journalists and human rights 
defenders and ensure that it contains 
adequate safeguards to protect individuals 
and organisations who defend fundamental 
rights, including environmental and climate 
rights, women’s rights, LGBTIQ rights, 
disability rights, the rights of minority racial 
or ethnic groups, labour rights, and religious 
freedoms. 
The Directive should cover all individuals 
involved in public participation in matters 
of public interest. Volt is actively working 
at the European level to strengthen these 
rules and will explore the introduction of 
further measures that safeguard media 
independence at the European level.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.


108
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
MAKING VOTES COUNT	
109
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
LIVEABLE PLANET
The danger and threat posed by climate change is undeniable. There is overwhelming 
evidence that human-made climate change leads to a destabilisation of weather patterns 
and the collapse of ecosystems. The human and economic cost of adapting to these negative 
consequences rises exponentially with every additional degree of global warming. It is well 
established that the only path toward mitigating climate change is the rapid and complete 
elimination of greenhouse gas emissions. Yet, despite this clear political imperative, robust 
and ambitious climate policies are lacking on many fronts due to strongly established interests 
working against the transition. 
Still, we must acknowledge the steps taken by the 2015 Paris Agreement as a diplomatic 
breakthrough in the fight against climate change. Almost all countries committed to limiting 
global warming to 2°C, aiming for 1.5°C, through strict and continuously reported nationally 
determined contributions (NDCs). This sets the groundwork for continuing to push for an 
ambitious climate agenda and adding layers of international climate policy such as the creation 
of a Loss & Damage fund.
The EU has implemented and proposed various policies to reach net-zero emissions by 2050, 
the latest being the “European Green Deal” with the “Fit for 55” legislation. This was a big step 
forward, but still not ambitious enough to be in line with the Paris Agreement. 
Volt is strongly committed to ensuring that European policies are in line with the Paris 
Agreement and that the EU does its fair share of staying within the 1.5-°C scenario of global 
warming.
The CO2 reductions we can achieve by 2030 are crucial and of the highest priority. We will 
therefore push for an additional climate emergency legislation package that pushes for CO2 
reductions until 2030 as much as possible.
More importantly, climate change is developing along with large injustices. The richest 10% of 
Europeans emit over three times more greenhouse gases (GHGs) per capita than the rest, while 
those who have contributed the least are likely to be the most affected by its devastating 
consequences and associated policies through higher food and energy prices. Policies must 
account for their disproportionate effects on different parts of society and introduce climate 
reparations and adaptation support as a fundamental part.
9. Climate 
Transition Act
The total costs of this Act, which consist of 
the implementation costs and the annual 
costs for five years, is € 10.540.000.000.  The 
implementation costs are € 1.440.000.000 and 
the annual costs are € 1.820.000.000.
Examples of implementation costs in the 
Moonshot Program are the policy and legal 
framework development, the capacity building 
and training of (new) staff, the building of IT 
or physical infrastructure, or public awareness 
campaigns.
Examples of annual costs are salaries and 
benefits, administrative costs, infrastructure 
maintenance, or the costs associated with the 
running of the proposed policies.
The total costs of the complete Moonshot 
Program are mentioned separately from the 
total income.
Costs and Income of the 
proposals included in the Act
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
MAKING VOTES COUNT	
108
Volt Europe


110
111
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
LIVEABLE PLANET
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
LIVEABLE PLANET
111
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
LIVEABLE PLANET
While the EU only represents 6.9% of global GHG emissions and around 5% of the population, 
it holds significant influence in international trade due to its consumption patterns and EU 
standards on products entering its borders. The current members of the EU are responsible for 
17.3% of the global historic greenhouse gas emissions. It is therefore vital that the EU not only 
considers the decarbonisation of its modes of production but also its consumption and impact 
on global supply chains. Member States must also be given the technology and funding needed 
to decarbonise their electrical grid and transportation and convert to greener forms of energy.
Our Climate Transition Act focuses on reducing emissions as fast as possible and takes a 
holistic approach to a complex issue. It pairs novel interventions with specific measures 
targeting the largest emitting sectors, transportation, energy supply and industry. The Climate 
Transition Act protects and strengthens European Competitiveness. The green transition 
offers a vast opportunity for the EU’s economy, since through public and private investment 
we can stimulate growth, create jobs, and place the EU as a global leader in green technologies 
and climate policy.
Aim for net climate neutrality of the EU in 
2040.
Foster public-private investment via a new 
EU Climate Investment Platform, which 
would be an extension of InvestEU.
Boost the Net-Zero Industry Act through 
EU funding and provide greater financial 
resources to create a level playing field on 
the global stage. 
Define the overall CO2e maximum budget 
for the EU that is in line with the 1.5 
°C global warming scenario and takes 
into account the EU’s responsibility and 
capabilities. Make sure all legislation is in 
line with that maximum budget.
Initiate a climate emergency legislation 
package to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions by 80% by 2030 compared to 
2019.
Work towards climate neutrality in energy 
production and use by 2035.
.
.
.
.
.
.
1.	 Setting ambitious targets 
to meet the Paris Agreement


112
113
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
LIVEABLE PLANET
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
LIVEABLE PLANET
Support legally binding treaties for 
planned climate migration, aiming 
to prevent conflicts and preserve 
lifestyles.
Explore circular economy principles 
in policy reform, focusing on waste 
reduction, material retention, and 
natural ecosystem regeneration in 
adaptation plans.
Support local, national and effective 
cross-border deposit and lending 
systems for reusable packaging, 
bottles and cans that are eventually 
recognised across Europe.
Extend the Innovation and Social 
Climate Funds and direct funds toward 
disadvantaged communities and innovative 
industries.
Maintain the high share of the total 
revenues generated by the EU ETS used 
for climate- and energy-related purposes 
(est. 75% between 2013 and 2021) while 
ensuring that these revenues are also used 
to support low-income communities, as well 
as those most heavily impacted by climate 
change (‘carbon dividends’, i.e., direct 
cash payments to citizens, have proven a 
successful best practice in Switzerland and 
Canada).
Ensure that the transitions include 
adaptation strategies that allow 
communities to increase their adaptive 
capacity. We strongly advocate for 
consistent and binding climate impact 
adaptation measures:
Strengthen flood defences and 
coordinate adaptation plans in 
vulnerable European coastal areas.
Expand the European Civil Protection 
and Humanitarian Aid Operations 
to prepare for an increasing and 
intensifying number of natural 
disasters.
Develop a strategy for insurance 
underwriters and risk management, 
ensuring long-term protection 
assessments and funding for climate-
resilient infrastructure.
Extend the Emissions Trading System 
(ETS) to include negative emissions, and 
to cover at least 90% (2021 ca. 40%) of all 
EU carbon emissions under a single cap by 
the end of 2025 at the latest. This means 
expediting the introduction of the planned 
ETS 2, covering buildings, road transport 
and additional small industries, as well as 
including emissions from industrial animal 
farming. Reduce the number of allowances 
(scope-adjusted) in line with Volt’s 
reduction targets.
Extend the Industrial Emissions Directive 
(IED) to all types of industrial animal 
farming, applying to holdings that contain 
the number of animals deemed relevant by 
science.
Introduce a carbon tax for any sectors 
where an expanded ETS would cause 
disproportionate administrative effort 
(e.g., highly fragmented industries that can 
hardly be captured upstream).
Support the final implementation of 
a robust carbon border adjustment 
mechanism (CBAM).
Ensure proper taxation of kerosene and 
other fossil fuels as part of the wider 
strategy towards a just transition that 
provides clear and accountable targets for 
ending subsidies for fossil fuels.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2.	Just transition without 
harmful subsidies


114
115
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
LIVEABLE PLANET
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
LIVEABLE PLANET
Give greater emphasis to the impact 
on vulnerable communities and include 
contingency strategies in long-term policies.
Embed climate mitigation and adaptation 
considerations into every sphere of 
policymaking to ensure consistency and 
coordination across all aspects of climate 
change that impact our lives. 
Improve cross-functional collaboration, 
fast-tracking climate-relevant legislation 
and taking a risk management approach to 
climate policy. 
.
.
.
4.	Holistic climate governance
Create an EU-wide sustainability index, 
similar to the existing ones for the 
efficiency of domestic appliances and 
houses, that considers the complete 
environmental footprint of products and 
rates it on a simple scale that translates its 
impact on sustainability.
Enforce the use of this objective sustainably 
index as one of the criteria used on all 
public procurement across member states.
Ensure the transparent reporting of all 
climate-relevant externalities of products 
and services, empowering consumers to 
make more sustainable choices.
Extend the Corporate Sustainability 
Reporting Directive to include an end-
customer component. This will require 
companies to establish transparency for 
individual products and services on GHG 
footprint, recyclability, environmental 
impact, and other metrics at the point of 
sale.
.
.
.
.
3.	Sustainability Disclosure and 
Consumer Empowerment


116
117
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
LIVEABLE PLANET
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
LIVEABLE PLANET
Promote and subsidise an EU-wide MaaS 
(Mobility as a Service) Platform aiming to 
provide seamless, affordable, and eco-
friendly transportation options, making it 
easier to transition away from private car 
ownership. 
Ban the use of fossil fuels in road vehicles 
by 2035. This does not ban the sale or use 
of internal combustion engines as long as 
they burn biofuels or synfuels.
Abolish taxation exemptions on aircraft 
fuel and increase efforts to achieve net 
zero emissions in European international 
and domestic aviation by 2040 through the 
Aviation Advisory Council (ACARE).
Strengthen and expand the rail system in 
Europe, since more than 20% of CO2 in the 
EU originates from transport, be it from 
road transport (72% of total) or aviation 
(14%), while rail makes up only 0.4% of 
carbon emissions:
Harmonise infrastructure across 
Europe, in particular about the 
European Train Control System (ETCS), 
platform height, track gauge and the 
approval of railway vehicles.
Propose considerable EU-wide 
investments and subsidies on all 
levels of rail transportation, such as 
integrated long- and medium-distance 
railway networks for goods and 
passengers, a European High-Speed 
Rail (HSR) network, and regional and 
local public transport. Expand and 
improve national and international 
night train services as a convenient 
alternative to air travel.
Empower the proposed European Transport 
Authority (ETA, see Thriving Together Act) 
with consultative legislative authority and 
financial resources to oversee investments 
in cross-border and high-speed rail 
infrastructure across Europe and to push 
innovation and sustainability in the aviation 
and shipping industries.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
6.	Low-carbon 
transport sector                               
Spearheaded a coherent strategy to 
leverage scientific knowledge, cross-
country collaboration, and design 
appropriate economic incentives. 
Launch large-scale European research 
programs on carbon sequestration 
methods, both artificial and biological.
Bring an end to harmful subsidies and 
ensure proper taxation of fossil fuels.
Commit to a Climate Neutral Economy by 
2040 (Energy sector by 2035), aiming for 
a negative emission capacity. Ensure the 
protection, restoration and growth of natural 
carbon sinks that are vital to achieve this:
Increase efforts in sustainable 
forest management, restoration and 
afforestation.
Push for conservation and restoration 
of wetlands.
Replace current subsidies for 
unsustainable agricultural practices 
with subsidies to promote the quick 
adoption of eco-friendly practices that 
are known or under development (e.g. 
perennial and polyculture agricultural 
production systems).
Promote the diversification of crop 
species that have a very high rate of 
carbon sequestration per unit of area 
and time and constitute a source of 
sustainable raw materials for a variety 
of value-added products, such as hemp 
and bamboo.
Increase the number of protected 
wildlife areas, as per the UN 
biodiversity plan.
Improve the protection and health of 
European waterways.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
5.	Negative emissions 
strategy


118
119
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
LIVEABLE PLANET
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
LIVEABLE PLANET
Foster building new infrastructures to 
allow the production of millions of tons 
of low-carbon hydrogen by 2040, which 
can contribute to the decarbonisation of 
European industry and transport systems 
without financially disturbing them.
Replace the use of natural gas by 
households with as much biogas as possible 
in the short and medium term. Produce the 
biogas in the EU with innovative methods 
and convey it to households via the same 
gas transport infrastructure. Introduce price 
caps for EU biogas.
Prepare a differentiated, European 
strategy that prioritises decarbonization, 
ensures safety, introduces a nuclear waste 
disposal concept, and promotes research 
and development, seizing long-term 
opportunities:
Allow existing reactors to continue 
operating in their current form until 
the agreed-upon end of their lifecycle. 
Ensure that runtime extensions 
are permitted only if: (1) all safety 
regulations valid at the time of 
the decision are met; (2) long-term 
operations are performed at the full 
cost of the operator; (3) the latest 
level of technological advancements at 
the time of the evaluation is achieved; 
(4) the reactor is needed to ensure 
climate neutrality. 
Allow the building and operation of 
already approved reactors under the 
respective agreed-upon contractual 
obligations.
Allow new reactors only if they are 
inherently safe (no active safety 
systems are required to bring the 
operation into a safe state of shut-
down) and robust against outside 
influences.
Promote research and support the 
adoption of advanced nuclear fission 
and fusion concepts, such as thorium 
cycles, molten salt, liquid-metal, 
Gen4, fast breeder, or small modular 
reactors.
Promote functional and efficient renewable 
energy systems by counteracting the 
increased volatility on the generation side 
caused by these fundamental changes 
to the energy supply mix. To that effect, 
introduce flexibility measures:
Leverage the flexibility on the demand 
side by promoting the necessary 
technical solutions (digital monitoring 
and control systems) and business 
models (e.g. aggregation-based 
models such as virtual power plants).
Deploy storage solutions for 
leveraging short-term (intraday) to 
long-term (seasonal) flexibility.
Promote smart planning and operation 
of infrastructure for improving the 
connectivity between generation and 
consumption hubs, thus leveraging the 
flexibility of a large interconnected 
system.
Eliminate existing sectoral silos and 
strengthen cross-sectoral links (electricity, 
gas, heating & cooling, mobility, waste, 
water) through technologies, business, 
regulatory and governance models, in 
line with the EU’s Strategy for Energy 
System Integration, thus achieving the 
decarbonization of the entire energy 
system and not only of the electricity 
system.
Promote changes in the energy supply 
mix and enforce alternative and carbon-
free sources of energy, transitioning to a 
sustainable European system and achieving 
full decarbonization of the energy system 
by 2035: 
Promote the total phase-out of coal 
by 2030 (lignite by 2025), prohibit 
new permits to drill for fossil fuels, 
and eliminate flaring immediately. 
In addition, ensure that 80% of all 
known fossil fuel reserves are left in 
the ground. Prohibit the advertising of 
fossil fuel products, similar to bans on 
cigarette advertisements. 
Promote a diversified portfolio of 
renewable energy sources (RES). 
To enable a mix of intermittent and 
mutually complementing sustainable 
energy sources, promote further 
research on geothermal energy, 
alongside research on ocean thermal 
energy conversion, tidal and wave 
energy, residual heat from industry, 
biomass, and new designs for 
solar and wind energy. Promote 
research in alternative technologies, 
including low-carbon and disruptive 
technologies such as sustainable 
chemistry concepts, bio-based 
solutions, and organic and plastic 
waste-to-fuel concepts, with particular 
emphasis on large-scale applications.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
7.	 Renewable Energy 
Systems


120
121
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
LIVEABLE PLANET
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
LIVEABLE PLANET
 Improve the security of supply by 
removing the temporary nature of 
capacity mechanisms.
Strengthen consumer protection 
by shielding consumers from price 
spikes and boosting retail market 
competition.
operation of tools to accommodate 
the flexibility needed locally (e.g., 
local flexibility markets, aggregator 
business models).
Account for the new framework 
conditions, which are mainly driven 
by three factors: decentralisation 
(reallocation and fragmentation of 
generation and flexibility resources), 
digitalisation (improved monitoring 
and control), and subsequent 
democratisation (more energy 
resources at citizen and local levels 
that empower these local agents to 
become more active participants of 
energy systems).
Propose a transitional period to account 
for the complexity of the identification and 
implementation of such far-reaching reform 
measures. Introduce short-term, possibly 
temporary measures that address issues in 
need of urgent action. Follow the general 
approach adopted by the Commission and 
approved by the Council:
Improve investment conditions 
for renewable energy sources by 
broadening the use of Contracts for 
Difference and promoting the uptake 
of Power Purchase Agreements.
Adopt reforms that promote an effective 
electricity market as a prerequisite for a 
successful transition to renewable energy 
systems:
Ensure that the market’s original goals 
can still be achieved by a different or 
improved market design. First, ensure 
a high level of market competition 
on the supply side, through effective 
unbundling regulations and facilitated 
supplier switching for consumers. 
Second, ensure that there are enough 
incentives for the investments in new 
generation and infrastructure needed 
to implement renewable energy 
systems. Third, maintain an effective 
economic dispatch of generation 
and flexibility resources to cover the 
energy demand at all times. To enable 
this, increase cross-border trading 
capacities and allow more dynamic 
trading (e.g., decreasing minimum 
product volumes and trading times).
Enhance the design to incorporate 
the new market goals, providing 
incentives for the deployment and 
effective operation of mechanisms for 
flexibility (storage and demand side 
management). Improve established 
centralised markets and introduce 
decentralised market-driven solutions 
that enable the deployment and 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
8. Improved electricity 
market 


122
123
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
LIVEABLE PLANET
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
LIVEABLE PLANET
Improve certification and validation 
processes for nuclear installations and 
generalise them for all countries of the EU 
with nuclear energy in their program. This 
avoids unnecessary duplication of identical 
procedures in different countries.
Facilitate and coordinate European 
initiatives for full recycling of used nuclear 
fuel and accelerate deployment of nuclear 
waste recycling technologies. This greatly 
reduces the volume of nuclear waste and 
the time that it needs to be stored.
Remove intricate regulatory hurdles in the 
process of obtaining permits for new low-
carbon emitting energy plants, which can 
take several years, pushing for the quick 
conclusion stipulated in the EU Renewable 
Energy Directive:
Streamline and harmonise 
administrative procedures and reduce 
bureaucratic complexities.
Improve administrative frameworks for 
permitting and offer capacity-building 
support to enhance efficiency and 
effectiveness.
Identify and disseminate best practices 
to foster mutual learning and optimise 
permitting processes.
Facilitate spatial planning by creating 
low-carbon energy zoning maps and 
implementing participatory processes 
to ensure sustainable land use.
Increase public engagement by 
empowering communities to partake 
in the ownership and benefits of low-
carbon energy development, as well 
as ensuring participation from low-
income and vulnerable households.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
10. Low carbon-emitting 
energy sources
Prioritise measures for guaranteeing 
resource adequacy that lower the 
dependence on regions outside the EU.
Promote resilience standards over 
absolute security standards about the 
energy system’s digital infrastructure, 
building on the EU’s action plan for 
Digitising the Energy System.
Reevaluate the scope and the standards of 
European energy systems’ resilience and 
security of supply, to:
Ensure that improved European 
Resource Adequacy Assessments 
suitably include new options to 
guarantee resource adequacy, 
such as storage and demand-side 
management, and properly account 
for the non-uniform levels of 
adequacy between bidding zones 
due to structural constraints in the 
transmission networks.
.
.
.
.
9. Energy system resilience 
and security of supply


124
125
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
LIVEABLE PLANET
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
LIVEABLE PLANET
Enable owners of homes and offices 
to make the necessary investments by 
harmonising and increasing public financing 
and by offering direct low-interest financing 
from the European Investment Bank (EIB). 
Raise awareness and engage citizens about 
the possibilities of green buildings.
Encourage the development of a properly 
sized and well-qualified retrofit industry 
through training, labour mobility, and best 
practice sharing.
Ensure Member States have equal access 
to available support programs, levelling the 
playing field with larger participants.
Harmonise national regulations that 
empower consumers to actively engage 
in all energy markets, either individually 
or as part of citizen energy communities. 
This would encompass activities such 
as electricity generation, consumption, 
sharing, and sales, as well as offering 
flexibility services through demand-
response and storage solutions. This 
aims to enhance the adoption of energy 
communities and streamline the integration 
of citizens into the electricity system as 
active participants.
Promote the replacement of individual 
fossil-fueled heating and cooling 
installations with alternatives such as 
renewably powered electric heating, heat 
pumps, and solar water heating.
Promote better energy efficiency (e.g., 
insulation, energy-saving appliances, 
behavioural change) and the use of 
sustainable building materials when 
constructing or renovating buildings.
Set near-zero energy building (nZEB) 
standards for all new buildings in the EU 
by 2030 and net zero emissions for all 
buildings (including existing building stock) 
by 2035.
Develop standards for resource-efficient 
design and integrated construction 
processes. Measure the efficiency of 
building design with both the annual “in-
use” energy and the carbon footprint of the 
overall construction process (differentiating 
between “Operational Carbon” and 
“Embodied Carbon”). Promote mapping 
buildings by continual energy performance 
data to allow consensus on the meaning of 
sustainable design and access to accurate 
measurement of “Whole Life Carbon” within 
the building lifecycle.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
11. Energy communities and 
decentralized energy systems
12. Sustainable buildings


126
127
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
LIVEABLE PLANET
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
LIVEABLE PLANET
Volt’s  Climate Transition Act touches on the 
Directives and Regulations falling under the 
European Great Deal, Net Zero Emissions 
by 2050, and Just Transition Mechanism 
initiatives.  The Act, notably comprised of 11 
Moonshot policies, which advocate for climate 
neutrality across various facets of climate 
policy, decarbonization, energy transition, 
and sustainable development, necessitates 
modifications within the purview of the 
following three central legislative instruments: 
Regulation (EU) 2021/1119 on EU Climate 
Law, Directive (EU) 2018/2001 pertaining to 
Renewable Energy Directive II, and Directive 
(EU) 2022/2464 concerning Corporate 
Sustainability Reporting, among others falling 
under the initiatives mentioned.
The Moonshot policies impact the already 
existing legislation by suggesting new 
innovative ways through which crucial matters 
can be remediated. For instance, Regulation 
(EU) 2021/1119 on EU Climate Law needs to be 
The total costs of this Act, which consist of 
the implementation costs and the annual 
costs for five years, is € 446.782.500.000.  The 
implementation costs are € 261.430.000.000 
and the annual costs are € 37.070.500.000.
Examples of implementation costs in the 
Moonshot Program are the policy and legal 
framework development, the capacity building 
and training of (new) staff, the building of IT 
or physical infrastructure, or public awareness 
campaigns.
Examples of annual costs are salaries and 
benefits, administrative costs, infrastructure 
maintenance, or the costs associated with the 
running of the proposed policies.
The total costs of the complete Moonshot 
Program are mentioned separately from the 
total income.
How we will pursue this act in 
the European Parliament 
Costs and Income of the 
proposals included in the Act
amended to call more for the stark disparities 
in greenhouse gas emissions within Europe to 
be addressed as these are clear inequalities 
(i.e., the wealthiest 10% emit over three times 
more per capita than others). At the same 
time, Volt acknowledges the Directive (EU) 
2018/2001 pertaining to Renewable Energy 
Directive II and adds to the already existing 
legislation the idea that decarbonisation should 
take place not only at the production level 
but also at the consumptions level and across 
global supply chains.  Another impact on the 
already existing legislation that few of the 
Moonshot policies have on the Directive (EU) 
2022/2464 concerning Corporate Sustainability 
Reporting as there is a clear emphasis on the 
fact that there should be more focus within the 
Articles drafted on the opportunities the green 
transition brings in terms of economic growth, 
job creation, green transition and climate 
policy.


128
129
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
LIVEABLE PLANET
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
LIVEABLE PLANET
The environmental crisis we confront extends beyond climate change. It encompasses 
widespread pollution, biodiversity depletion, and the destruction of our natural habitats. These 
issues are not isolated. They are interconnected symptoms of our unsustainable production 
and consumption patterns and the exceeding of planetary boundaries.
To effectively address these multifaceted environmental challenges, we require a 
comprehensive ‘One Health’ approach and the involvement of all actors. It is essential to 
acknowledge that tackling climate change is inseparable from preserving vital natural 
ecosystems, which serve as carbon sinks and the foundation of our food supply. Furthermore, 
the degradation of these ecosystems renders us more vulnerable to rising natural disasters like 
floods and wildfires, which are already on the rise at an alarming rate.
Our impact on the environment affects planetary health and is intimately linked to human 
health. Increasing pollution, spanning from air pollution to land and ocean contamination, 
exacts a mounting toll on our well-being and places additional burdens on our already 
stretched healthcare systems. Overcoming short-term thinking is imperative.
Rather than viewing the natural world as something to be subdued and exploited at any 
cost, we must recognize that a harmonised coexistence is the only way to continue life on 
this planet. There are subsidies for harmful and polluting activities, supporting intensive 
animal farming and unsustainable deforestation, overuse of antimicrobials, overfishing, 
and unsustainable consumption patterns. This is what we currently witness - and it strongly 
motivates us to act. 
Following the principle of public money for public goods, our view is that EU funds should focus 
on funding desirable practices and phasing out harmful subsidies and policies. 
We must empower consumers to foster choices that are more sustainable and promote circular 
consumption patterns to safeguard our natural world and its ecosystems. At the same time, 
other food chain actors must be engaged.
10. Healthy 
Ecosystems Act
Moving towards a more sustainable agricultural sector, in collaboration with our farmers, is 
critical for the green transition. Small and medium farmers are being squeezed by exploitative 
commercial relations and this is reflected in the decrease of farms in Europe. We envisage a 
policy reform that promotes better livelihoods for farmers, intergenerational renewal, and 
stimulates local economies. Rewarding farmers who work in harmony with nature is essential 
for creating a green future and safeguarding Europe’s strategic autonomy. The need for change 
extends to our forest and our ocean policy.
These actions collectively fortify the development of resilient and sustainable communities, 
ensuring they are endowed with accessible green spaces that augment human well-
being, improve animal welfare, and combat antimicrobial resistance, underscoring the 
interconnectedness of human, animal, and environmental health, to the benefit of public 
health, the well-being of present and future generations, and all living organisms on this 
planet.


130
131
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
LIVEABLE PLANET
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
LIVEABLE PLANET
Pursue a One Health approach by attaining 
World Health Organization (WHO) 
guidelines involves maintaining strict air 
quality standards to guarantee everyone’s 
right and freedom to breathe clean air, 
limiting long-term exposure to pollutants 
like PM2.5 and NO2 across Europe, ensuring 
levels do not exceed 5 µg/m³ PM2.5 and 10 
µg/m³ NO2. 
Enforcing a thorough ban on chemicals 
scientifically proven to harm human and 
environmental health is crucial.
Align the Nature Restoration Law (NRL) 
with environmental science, also taking 
note of the World Health Organization 
(WHO) guidelines on air pollution, 
residential green space, chemicals, and 
noise; and establish ambitious targets for 
all natural areas in need of restoration:
Re-wet at least 30% of EU peatlands by 
2030.
Convert at least 10% of urban areas 
into green and blue spaces (open 
streams, rivers, ponds and lakes) by 
2040, and at least 15% by 2050, and 
protect them legally.
Extend the NRL to include the habitats 
of fish species that are in critical state.
Set the target for at least 10% of 
each farm to be dedicated to nature 
restoration by 2030.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
1. Nature Restoration Law 
130
Volt Europe
Support only sustainable aquaculture. EU 
funds must only be directed towards truly 
sustainable aquaculture practices, and 
policies in parallel must work to effectively 
bring back overall food consumption 
patterns to sustainable levels.
Reinforce legislation concerning 
aquaculture and its effluents and waste 
to prevent disruptive nutrient gradients, 
supporting a sustainable, circular, and 
biodiversity-friendly form of aquaculture.
Create an action plan to boost the 
sustainable production of algae and 
promote the innovative use of products 
made with this protein. Europe consumes 
large quantities of algae, yet 97% of global 
production comes from Asia. There is a clear 
opportunity for strategic autonomy, which 
can be fulfilled by setting realistic enablers 
for the algae sector to take off, including 
funding, investment in R&D, and raising 
consumer awareness and acceptance of 
algae products in the EU.
Support green hydrogen-powered fishing 
vessels to reduce fossil fuel dependence.
Phase-out the use of fishing gear that 
has an undesired negative impact on 
ecosystems, such as the destruction of 
corals and catch of unintended species 
(bycatch); destructive practices, such 
as bottom trawling, starting in marine 
protected areas (MPAs); and harmful 
subsidies, particularly fuel tax exemption.
Adjust fishing quotas according to the 
recommendations put forward by the 
International Council for the Exploration 
of the Sea (ICES), which officially informs 
the decision-making process. Promote 
transparency and accountability over the 
closed-door Council meetings that define 
the final quotas set by Member-states, 
often exceeding the advised limits. 
Support small-scale fisheries by providing 
fair incentives under the Common Fisheries 
Policy (CFP) and enabling their effective 
participation in the political decision-
making process, as they play a vital role 
in the livelihood of coastal communities 
and local economies, and are known to 
have a smaller environmental impact when 
compared with large-scale fisheries. 
Support strong mechanisms and dissuasive 
penalties to tackle illegal, unreported, and 
unregulated fishing (IUU). For this, it is also 
vital to ensure effective cooperation with 
third countries to restore marine stocks and 
protect MPAs.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2.	Ocean ecosystems


132
133
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
LIVEABLE PLANET
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
LIVEABLE PLANET
Simplify bureaucratic procedures and 
increase transparency for CAP recipients, 
particularly small and medium farmers, 
through access to a centralised and intuitive 
EU platform for knowledge and advice 
exchange regarding procedures, rights and 
duties, farming practices, and for document 
submission, in cooperation with the 
relevant national ministries.
Train the staff from the competent national 
ministries to empower them to help farmers 
with their queries adequately.
Adequately support small and medium 
farmers and provide stronger incentives for 
young farmers to remain in the business 
and for new entrants, particularly women, 
to guarantee the intergenerational 
renewal of farmers. Double from 3 to 6% 
of Member-states’ annual direct payments’ 
envelope for interventions targeting 
generational renewal. 
Develop an exchange sub-program within 
Erasmus focusing on sustainable farming 
practices for apprentices, newcomers, or 
the wider farming community.
Support a deepened EU food market 
oversight, since it is an essential 
commodity, to protect consumers and 
provide stable and fair prices for farmers. 
Create a framework for fair retailer 
contracts, a mechanism for local and direct 
sale schemes, and improved anti-dumping 
measures and surveillance. Examine 
competition and pricing practices. Small and 
medium farmers face particular challenges 
from exploitative retailer relations, 
oligopoly corporate control, and WTO price 
issues. They face high production costs and 
the longstanding wrong CAP policies, which 
hinder fairness and sustainability. 
Support the establishment of local 
agricultural cooperatives to stabilise 
food prices, guarantee stable and fair 
incomes for farmers and stimulate local 
supply chains. Set guidelines for Member-
states to promote the establishment of 
agri-cooperatives nationally. Launch an 
EU-wide public platform for knowledge and 
information for consumers and producers.
Adopt EU-wide measures to reduce the 
production cost for farmers and the price 
paid by consumers of healthier and more 
sustainable foods, by rebalancing the 
Common Agricultural Policy’s subsidies to 
production.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
4. Social reform of the 
Common Agricultural Policy
Improve the protection and health of 
European waterways by updating the Water 
Framework Directive (WFD) and the Marine 
Strategy Framework Directive (MSFD) and 
speeding up their implementation, as only 
40% of surface water bodies surveyed 
by the European Environmental Agency 
(EEA) in 2018 were found to be in a good 
ecological state.
Set an EU-wide action plan for the 
forestry sector, supporting an ecosystem-
based forest management approach, as 
reconciling nature protection with the 
commercial use of forest resources is 
possible and needed. This approach aims 
to respect the natural cycle of forests to 
the maximum possible, helping protect and 
restore the EU’s forests and leading to a 
more consistent revenue stream for forest 
owners.
Promote natural carbon-capturing 
by increasing efforts in sustainable 
forest management, restoration, and 
afforestation. Focus agricultural and 
forestry practices on emission reduction 
and landscape preservation, aiming at pre-
industrial levels of terrestrial carbon stocks 
in Europe and combating desertification.
Push for conservation and restoration of 
wetlands. Focus on peatlands (which can 
store twice as much carbon as forests) 
by imposing an immediate moratorium 
on peat exploitation until legislation is 
strengthened to ensure its protection 
and sustainable management, in addition 
to actively restoring already exploited 
peatlands to their natural state.
.
.
.
.
3. Forest restoration


134
135
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
LIVEABLE PLANET
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
LIVEABLE PLANET
Support R&D for innovative farming 
systems powered by green energy, such as 
vertical farming and hydroponics, in urban 
contexts to ensure more sustainable and 
shorter food supply chains.
Support precision farming and the 
implementation of automation for farms 
where such technology makes sense to 
reduce input dependency (like water and 
pesticides) and make farming practices 
environmentally sustainable. Promote 
farmer intergenerational renewal by 
attracting highly educated individuals. 
Create an agricultural green transition 
fund to enable farmers to get low-interest 
loans and state liability for adaptation to 
the green transition, facilitating farmers 
reaching sustainability requirements. 
Promote habitat restoration, low impact, 
and biodiversity-friendly farming, and 
exclude any greenwashed actions. 
Inform the next Common Agricultural Policy 
reform with an ambitious and scientifically-
based action plan, mapping how the 
sector needs to change in the future years 
to guarantee its overall sustainability. 
Reduce the burden that the frequent 
and incomplete policy updates have on 
farmers’ stability and income, and have a 
scientifically-guided CAP.
Phase out subsidies to environmentally 
harmful farming practices and payments by 
a hectare of land owned and allocate them 
to desirable farming practices, supporting a 
shift to a model of regenerative agriculture, 
where sustainable and organic food, soil-
health restoration, pesticide reduction, 
sustainable water, and land use, reversal 
of biodiversity loss and animal welfare are 
strongly promoted. Guide and give financial 
support to Farmers during this transition 
period to guarantee their stability and 
income.
Promote models of rural development 
that stimulate local supply chains by 
harmonising overarching policy fields. For 
example, an effective transport system 
incentivizes the fixation of people in rural 
areas and supports farmers and local supply 
chains. The agricultural green transition 
also provides repopulation opportunities 
for rural areas, as it creates new green jobs 
and attracts qualified young people.
Provide incentives for the reduction of 
animals farmed, whilst limiting meat 
imports and adjusting meat demand 
with concurrent policies. Agriculture is 
responsible for 10.3% of the EU’s GHG 
emissions and 70% of those come from 
the animal sector. It is all about “less but 
better quality” meat if we want to return 
to sustainable consumption levels while 
maintaining farmers’ profitability.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
5. Environmental reform of the 
Common Agricultural Policy
Support further research and the eventual 
inclusion of genetically modified crops 
in the production portfolio of European 
farmers. Implement these techniques to 
promote climate change resilience and to 
ensure the sustainability of food production 
and farming practices.


136
137
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
LIVEABLE PLANET
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
LIVEABLE PLANET
Leverage the Common Agricultural 
Policy’s “Eco-Schemes”, whereby many of 
the agroecological actions proposed are 
common to organic farming requirements. 
The organic area made up only 9.1 % of 
total EU agricultural land in 2020 (5.8% in 
2012), so if the growth continues at the 
same rate as 2012-2020, the EU will only 
reach 15% of organic farmland by 2031.
Support the European Commission’s target 
to reduce chemical pesticide use by 50% by 
2030, while stimulating the mainstreaming 
of integrated pest management (IMP) 
practices to reduce the need for pesticides 
and supporting other agroecological 
practices.
Provide reinforced financial incentives from 
the Common Agricultural Policy for farm 
conversion to achieve the Green Deal target 
of 25% organic farmland by 2030.
.
.
.
6. Organic and regenerative 
farming
exclusivity) of plant-based dishes, food 
waste and organic ratios. Offer educational 
resources for professional training of chefs.
Increase funding opportunities for R&D to 
develop healthy plant-based alternatives, 
as the sector remains largely underfunded 
compared to its animal-based counterparts.
	
Restrict the use of EU marketing subsidies 
from the Common Agricultural Policy to 
promote the consumption of foods which, 
according to nutritional and environmental 
science, we should be increasing the intake 
of.
Extend EU “School Schemes for fruit, 
vegetables and milk” to healthy plant-based 
alternatives to milk, catering for children 
with allergies and different preferences 
or ethical concerns and promoting more 
sustainable diets.
Boost EU investment in R&D for cultivated 
meat, seafood and additional animal-
derived products and for other relevant 
food technologies, to accelerate their 
study and development. These may be 
critical to making our food system more 
environmentally sustainable.
Harmonise European policies to support a 
dietary shift to a planetary health diet, which 
is rich in plant-based foods and with fewer 
animal-source foods, conferring improved 
health and environmental benefits. 
Develop an overarching EU Action Plan to 
shape our food system and habits to reach 
nutritional and environmental scientific 
recommendations, as Denmark has recently 
done. Adapt Common Agricultural Policy 
subsidy schemes and establish consumption 
targets for the increase of plant-based food 
and decrease of animal protein.
Adapt market mechanisms for better access 
and affordability of plant-based proteins 
along the food chain, creating a level 
playing field for these foods to compete 
in the market. Rebalance the Common 
Agricultural Policy to favour products that 
are not emission-intensive like animal-
sourced foods.
Adopt EU-wide measures within the 
Common Agricultural Policy to reduce 
the cost of healthy and sustainable foods, 
including plant-based foods.
Make EU Green Public Procurement 
Guidelines mandatory for public food 
services, including those of the EU 
Institutions. The Guidelines set targets 
for the weekly availability (and often 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
7. Healthy and 
sustainable diets


138
139
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
LIVEABLE PLANET
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
LIVEABLE PLANET
Promote the importance of organic and 
regenerative farming amongst the public 
through communication campaigns to 
attract more consumers and new farmers 
- financeable for example through the EU 
promotional schemes.
Establish mandatory and harmonised food 
labelling for origin and production methods 
and for processed food and meals sold 
through public institutions and restaurants. 
Introduce a mandatory labelling system 
for animal-derived products, including 
processed items, that classifies the rearing, 
transport and slaughter conditions. 
Establish a mandatory and harmonised 
labelling system for the nutritional value 
of food products, as a way to improve our 
health.
Establish an EU-wide label with a scoring 
system for product environmental 
sustainability, applicable to a wide range 
of categories, including food. Take into 
account carbon emissions, pesticide use, air 
pollution, and other relevant environmental 
parameters.
Revise the Textile Labelling Regulation 
to introduce information regarding 
sustainability, recyclability and circularity 
parameters to reduce textile waste, 
promote a circular economy and incentivise 
eco-designs.
.
.
.
.
.
8. Consumer empowerment
following scientific recommendations 
related to human and animal health 
and the environment, and the call 
made by citizens in the ECI ‘End The 
Cage Age’.
Outlaw the shredding and gassing 
of male chicks, which are routinely 
performed due to their unprofitability 
in the meat and egg industries, 
transitioning to technologies that 
identify the sex before hatching. In-
ovo sexing is already being rolled out 
in some Member-states.
Address the widespread non-
compliance with legislation that 
prohibits routine pig tail docking 
(Council Directive 2008/120/EC), 
as it is still routinely performed in 
most member-states 15 years after 
the directive came into force, by 
sanctioning non-compliant Member-
states, and outlaw painful mutilations 
without pain-killers.
Outlaw rearing fast-growing breeds 
that inflict suffering and health issues 
on animals to increase profitability.
Impose compulsory video surveillance 
in slaughterhouses to contribute to 
better enforcement of animal welfare 
laws (already mandatory in Spain).
Support a revision of the EU’s animal 
welfare legislation (Council Directive 
98/58/EC), which is scientifically outdated, 
excludes many farmed species, and is poorly 
enforced:
Include species-specific and 
scientifically updated laws that cover 
all animals that are farmed or kept by 
humans, including aquatic animals.
Phase out long-distance animal 
transport to non-EU countries and add 
strict limits within the EU, following 
species-specific and science-based 
minimum standards; transition to 
the transport of meat/carcasses and 
genetic material; promote local and 
mobile slaughterhouse; and establish 
a strict and transparent monitoring 
and reporting system to ensure that 
violations are effectively identified, 
prevented and sanctioned.
Phase out fur production with a 
financial incentive and prohibit imports 
of fur products from third countries, 
following scientific concerns with 
human health, animal welfare and 
the environment, and also the call 
of citizens in the European Citizens’ 
Initiative (ECI) ‘Fur Free Europe’.
Phase-out individual caging in farming 
with the support of funds and policies 
from the Common Agricultural Policy, 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
9. Animal welfare in farms


140
141
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
LIVEABLE PLANET
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
LIVEABLE PLANET
Increase the funding for research into 
alternatives to animal testing. Establish 
a roadmap with clear goals to reduce, 
refine and replace (RRR) animal testing, 
and enhance institutional cooperation 
to exchange knowledge and accelerate 
progress. The EU needs to step up to reach 
its commitments to RRR regarding the use 
of animals in scientific experiments, as over 
10 million animals are still tested every year. 
Regulate exotic pet trade through an EU-
wide positive list to protect biodiversity, 
human health, and that of other animals. 
The list would detail which animal species 
are allowed to be traded as companion 
animals.
Support the inclusion of animal welfare 
explicitly in the job title of the relevant 
EU Commissioner to increase institutional 
accountability and emphasise the 
importance of the topic in decision-making 
expected by European citizens.
Outlaw the reproduction and use of wild 
animals for entertainment, including the 
use in circuses, bullfights and events of 
similar nature, aquariums/dolphinaria and 
zoos, supporting a transition period for 
establishments to adapt their business 
and to pair the wild animals used for 
entertainment with sanctuaries.
Address illegal pet trade in the EU and 
establish an action plan to tackle the issue. 
Implement coordinating legislation (under 
the Animal Health Law, Regulation 2016/49) 
for the licensing and registration of pet 
breeders to harmonise standards. Develop 
an EU database for the registration of pets 
(dogs, cats and ferrets), which must become 
mandatory (microchipping).
Interdict the reproduction of physically 
impaired pet breeds that experience 
stereotypical chronic health and welfare 
issues. Some member-states are legislating 
individually to prohibit the breeding of 
physically impaired pet breeds (such as 
brachycephalic/flat-faced breeds), but a 
harmonised approach is preferred to secure 
cross-border animal welfare and harmonise 
the market. 
.
.
.
.
.
.
10. General animal 
welfare
Further reduce antibiotic usage in animal 
farming, which has dropped significantly 
in the last decade, since many multi-
resistant pathogens are still found in animal 
products:
Limit mixing large numbers of 
animals from different origins (e.g. 
calf rearing). AMR is particularly 
aggravated by intensive animal 
farming since the cramped, unhealthy 
and stressful conditions in which 
animals are kept and transported 
create an environment where 
pathogens can thrive.
Support initiatives to de-intensify 
animal farming. 
Rear a more diverse portfolio of animal 
breeds to prevent the occurrence and 
spread of diseases and have a more 
resilient production system.
Implement reinforced EU-wide 
education and training programs for 
farmers regarding antimicrobial usage, 
and awareness campaigns for the 
general public about the dangers of 
AMR.
Develop an EU-wide mandatory and 
scientifically-based preferential system 
for antibiotic use, so that the first choice 
treatment is the most appropriate one 
in all Member-states (as is already the 
case for veterinary usage), following the 
‘One Health’ approach. This will limit the 
unnecessary use of antibiotics in cases 
where usage is not indicated.
Adopt regulations for reserving antibiotics 
for emergency cases as an extension of 
the current regulation that limits access 
to certain antibiotics in the veterinary 
sector (Regulation 2019/6 on veterinary 
medicines).
Expand the current R&D initiatives for new 
treatments and medical technology.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
11. Antimicrobial resistance 
(AMR)


142
143
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
LIVEABLE PLANET
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
LIVEABLE PLANET
Extend the ETS system to animal farming, 
as pollution from this sector must also be 
accounted for.
Extend the Industrial Emissions Directive 
(IED) to all types of industrial animal 
farming, applying to holdings that contain 
the number of animals deemed relevant by 
science.
Ensure that the EU Emissions Trading 
System (ETS) includes land use, land use 
change, and forestry (LULUCF), with each 
member state treated as a single emitter. 
Conduct the accounting at the EU level, 
while allowing each Member State to 
respect their circumstances and pursue 
their strategy.
Tax agricultural emissions from animal 
husbandry and soil use at the source since 
they are local and fragmented. Cover 
other non-sector-specific emissions in 
the agricultural sector (such as electricity 
and tractor fuels) under the ETS, mid- or 
upstream.
Extend the Climate-ADAPT platform to 
become an EU-wide harmonised real-
time monitoring and decision support 
system, as it currently only serves as a 
knowledge base for data and best practices 
regarding climate change mitigation and 
adaptation. Implement an early warning 
system for extreme weather events and 
interface with the European Emergency 
Response Coordination Centre and national 
governments for orchestrating public aid.
.
.
.
.
.
.
12. Pricing the costs
13. Transparency, monitoring 
and reporting
Establish a comprehensive scoring system 
for monitoring ecosystem health and 
resilience, indicating areas in need of 
natural restoration. Apply it to all EU 
territories and make it publicly available 
online through an interactive map, 
containing regularly updated data. Link 
this scoring system to the Climate-ADAPT 
platform.


144
145
Volt Europe
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
LIVEABLE PLANET
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
LIVEABLE PLANET
The Healthy Ecosystems Act touches legally 
on the Directives and Regulations falling 
under the European Green Deal, Air Quality 
and Pollution Control, Common Agricultural 
Policy (CAP), Common Fisheries Policy (CFP), 
Circular Economy, and One Health Approach 
initiatives. The Act, notably comprised of 13 
Moonshot policies, which advocate for air 
quality, reduction of pollution, sustainable 
agriculture, waste management, and the 
interconnectedness of human, animal, 
and environmental health, necessitates 
modifications within the purview of the 
following legislative instruments Directive 
2008/50/EC on Ambient Air Quality and Cleaner 
Air for Europe, Industrial Emissions Directive 
(2010/75/EU), Waste Framework Directive 
(2008/98/EC), Packaging and Packaging Waste 
Directive (94/62/EC). 
By calling for particular focus on the 
interconnected environmental challenges by 
recognising that tackling climate change is 
inseparable from preserving vital ecosystems 
(i.e., carbon sinks, food supply), the Moonshot 
policies push for amendments in the Articles 
tackling these topics falling under the Directive 
The total costs of this Act, which consist of 
the implementation costs and the annual 
costs for five years, is € 1.015.000.000.  The 
implementation costs are € 115.000.000 and 
the annual costs are € 180.000.000.
Examples of implementation costs in the 
Moonshot Program are the policy and legal 
framework development, the capacity building 
and training of (new) staff, the building of IT 
or physical infrastructure, or public awareness 
campaigns.
Examples of annual costs are salaries and 
benefits, administrative costs, infrastructure 
maintenance, or the costs associated with the 
running of the proposed policies.
The total costs of the complete Moonshot 
Program are mentioned separately from the 
total income.
How we will pursue this act in 
the European Parliament 
Costs and Income of the 
proposals included in the Act
2008/50/EC on Ambient Air Quality and 
Cleaner Air for Europe. Moreover, the Industrial 
Emissions Directive (2010/75/EU) needs to 
call more for switching away from exploitative 
activities and unsustainable consumptions, and 
lastly by promoting the protection of natural 
resources, reversing species loss, mitigating 
climate change, and fostering resilient and 
sustainable communities that enhance human, 
animal, and environmental health, benefitting 
current and future generations and the entire 
ecosystem. Waste Framework Directive 
(2008/98/EC) and Packaging and Packaging 
Waste Directive (94/62/EC) are requested to 
require more attention to reversing species 
loss and promoting sustainable communities 
by reducing the negative environmental 
impact of waste generation and disposal. 
The Act supports a revamp of the current 
animal welfare legislation, amongst which the 
Council Directive 98/58/EC on the protection 
of animals. Furthermore, the Act calls for 
alignment between the nature restoration law 
and environmental science. 


147
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
LIVEABLE PLANET
146
Volt Europe
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
The total costs of the Moonshot Programme, 
which consist of the implementation costs 
and the annual costs for five years, is 
€ 5.452.156.000.000.  The implementation costs 
are € 2.092.589.000.000 and the annual costs 
are € 671.913.400.000.
Examples of implementation costs in the 
Moonshot Programme are the policy and legal 
framework development, the capacity building 
and training of (new) staff, the building of IT 
or physical infrastructure, or public awareness 
campaigns.
Examples of annual costs in the Moonshot 
Programme are salaries and benefits, 
administrative costs, infrastructure 
maintenance, or the costs associated with the 
running of the proposed policies.
The total income generated by 
implementing the Moonshot Programme is 
€ 5.452.156.141.973. This creates a total positive 
result of € 141.973 over five years. The income 
is generated over five years by the following 
proposals:
Increasing the EU budget	
	
	
	
€ 1.534.714.285.714
Increasing the Horizon Europe budget	
	
€ 191.034.000.000
Costs and Income of the 
proposals included in the 
Moonshot Programme
Proposed taxation of carbon emissions	
	
€ 450.000.000.000
Proposed taxation of digital services	 	
	
€ 625.000.000.000
Proposed taxation of unsustainable 
consumption	
€ 125.000.000.000
Proposed taxation of wealth	 	
	
	
€ 100.000.000.000
Proposed taxation of kerosine and fossil fuels	
€ 2.426.407.856.259
It should be noted that the income from the 
taxation of carbon emissions and the taxation 
of kerosine and fossil fuels is expected to 
decrease over time, due to the proposals 
focussing on lowering the use of fossil fuels. 
Even without these incomes, the proposals 
remain financially sustainable, since the 
implementation costs are not recurring costs.
Electoral Moonshot Programme
2024-29 Policy Acts
Contributors:
Heads of Policy at Volt Europa
Claudio Lanza
Inês Bravo Figueiredo
Leads of the College of Policy Shapers
Polen Turkmen
Noah von Heimendahl
Policy Shapers
Janko Heineken, Sarah Tegas, Kate Fistric, 
Charlotte Barsky, Ronan Kerleo, Stefanos 
Tyros, Teun Janssen, Clara Panella Gómez, 
Janne Gerrits, Christiaan Meinsma, Sascha 
Mann, Carlo Gaillard, Theo Doreleijers, 
Michael Eichelbeck, Diana Andrei, Rhia 
Lopes,  Philipp Decking, Jelmer van der Ende, 
Veronika Vancheri, Bram Vandeninden, 
Brieuc Hallouët, Anica Nerlich
Legislative Office
Mathea Essinger, Diana Andrei, Kremena 
Ganeva, Lara Steer
Budget Office
Benjamin F.A.C. Ector
Editorial Review
Luís Almeida Fernandes
Member’s Assembly
Maartje Huernink
Executive Assistants
Alessia Utano
Mrinalini Fauzdar
